### Acknowledgments

The Cambridge Handbook of Human Dignity is the result of a long-running project. In the first instance, in 2006–7, the International Union of Academies (IUA) and the European Science Foundation (ESF) initiated a series of workshops and a conference at which scholars from around the world, and from different disciplines, met to discuss various aspects of the topic of human dignity. Following those discussions, the editors developed the idea of a multidisciplinary handbook on human dignity and, happily, they found an enthusiastic reaction when inviting various scholars to participate in this enterprise.

We have received much help, encouragement and support in producing this handbook. First, we are particularly grateful to the former Presidents, Agostino Paravicini Bagliani and Miklos Mar ´ oth, and the Secretary General of the IUA, ´ Jean-Luc de Pape, for their support for this project. In the same way, we are very grateful for the support of the ESF, and in particular that of Rudiger Klein. Sec- ¨ ond, we wish to acknowledge the support shown by Cambridge University Press, as the development process of the book took much longer than expected. Our special thanks go to Finola O'Sullivan and Richard Woodham, who managed the process with great professionalism and patience and to Jonathan Ratcliffe for his careful editing of the manuscript. Third, we wish to record our appreciation of the enormous editorial contributions made by Naomi van Steenbergen and Dascha During. Naomi and Dascha did a great job, showing exceptional ¨ commitment and care. We want to thank both of them for their excellent work.