

---

### Human dignity: concepts, discussions, philosophical perspectives

MARCUS DÜWELL

The following introduction aims at an overview of relevant conceptual and philosophical distinctions and questions that discussions about human dignity are confronted with. I will mainly focus on questions about 'human dignity' that are relevant within the context of the human rights framework. First, I will explain why we are in need of a philosophical account of human dignity at all. Second, I will distinguish different ideal typical models of (human) dignity. Third, I will distinguish different conceptual questions related to different approaches to human dignity and their philosophical articulations. Fourth, I will investigate some relevant questions on the way towards an ethics of human dignity. Finally, I will propose some topics that I consider to be important questions for future philosophical debates about this concept.

#### **Why develop a philosophical account of human dignity?**

When in 1948 the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) was signed, human dignity was introduced as a kind of moral reference point for an agreement that could provide normative guidance for the interpretation of the human rights framework in general. Most people believed that they knew what human dignity was about: a consensus within the humanistic tradition, a secularized version of the Judeo-Christian concept of Imago Dei, an overlap between the ethical doctrines of important thinkers like Kant and Confucius, the normative core of the natural law tradition, a moral–political statement against the atrocities of the Nazi regime etc. Although obviously not everyone endorsed the notion, it was generally assumed that its meaning and status were clear – and thus it appeared superfluous to strive for a theoretical explanation and justification of the concept.

The number of publications in recent years demonstrates that this attitude has changed. It seems that the concept has lost its innocence: in discussions about cloning, embryo protection and euthanasia, the concept of 'human dignity' has been embraced by various societal groups with very different intentions. This emphatic use of the concept to articulate highly controversial issues made others hesitant to use this notion. For instance, one could consider debates in the United States, where the publications of the President's Council of Bioethics in the last decade created the impression that a conservative programme would be promoted under the title 'human dignity' (for example, President's Council on Bioethics 2008). An example on the European level was the attempt by Peter Kemp *et al*. (2000) to formulate four core bioethical principles – dignity, integrity, vulnerability and autonomy – that should function as the European alternative to more liberal bioethical principles as autonomy, nonmaleficence, beneficence and justice (Beauchamp and Childress 2013). Other examples were verdicts of the highest courts in France and Germany to forbid participation in activities such as peep shows or dwarf-throwing: these were judged as being incompatible with the dignity of the person and thus illegitimate – even though those participating claimed to do so on the basis of their own free decision. Such developments create the impression that human dignity formulates an alternative to the traditional liberal ethos for which a concept of autonomy would be fundamental; Brownsword (2003) speaks in this context of a 'dignitarian alliance' in bioethics that uses the concept of human dignity to undermine important starting-points of the human rights concept.

Ambivalences about the concept of 'human dignity' are so important because of the central position the concept adopts within the human rights framework. The United Nations ascribed a foundational role to this concept by declaring: 'These [human] rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person.'1 Similarly we find in Article 1 of the German Constitution: 'Human dignity shall be inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all state authority.' And in Article 2we read: 'The German people therefore acknowledges inviolable and inalienable human rights as the basis of every community, of peace and of justice in the world.' The 'therefore' in Article 2 suggests that human rights follow from human dignity, an idea we also find in the Declarations.2

In this light, it is clear that the way we understand human dignity influences our understanding of the human rights framework as such. But what is the normative content of human dignity? Often, human dignity is understood as a condemnation of the 'instrumentalization' of human beings, to treat them as mere objects.3 But how would that relate to the foundational role of human dignity? It is quite possible to avoid a reduction of human beings to mere objects, as in the Shoah, without being committed to the whole set of human

- 2 See Chapter 39 by Dreier in this volume for a detailed explanation.
- 3 Dur¨ ig's view is that respect for human dignity prevents one from treating human beings only as objects (Durig ¨ 1956). He refers at least implicitly to Kant's 'formula of humanity', which prescribes that human beings may not be treated 'merely as a means' (Kant 1996: 429). But this is not unproblematic: in Kant the understanding is much broader in the sense that Kant proscribes treating humanity always 'as an end' which goes beyond the negative formulation that forbids instrumentalization. If I don't help a person in need, I don't treat him merely as a means to my end; I just don't treat him at all. But a different question is whether I respect him as an end in himself.

<sup>1</sup> United Nations, International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966; International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966.

rights. To emphasize that human beings have a right not to be a victim of such extreme forms of dehumanization would entail identifying violations of human dignity with a subset of human rights violations, and subsequently to declare these forms of violations illegitimate. This interpretation of a *distinct* normative content of human dignity is different from an understanding of human dignity as the *basic principle* of the legal order. And if we would understand human dignity as a fundamental principle, how should we determine its normative content? How can the human rights be derived from human dignity? What would be the rule of interpretation?

These considerations are particularly important because human dignity is assumed to be of overriding importance. While the diverse rights have to be weighed against each other, this is not the case with human dignity. Human dignity will always trump other considerations. But this means that it may easily be a Trojan horse if we do not understand what it means and how to use it: if we have a concept that can trump the human rights while there is no principled understanding of how it is used, this could ultimately undermine the legal status and the moral authority of the entire human rights framework. As such, the conceptual clarification of human dignity is a very important philosophical task. In the following, I will therefore try to set out an overview of the questions necessary to develop an understanding of the concept. These questions are also relevant for those scholars who are sceptical whether human dignity is a meaningful, worthwhile or useful concept at all. Such a negative judgment should be the result of a careful examination of all questions mentioned below.

#### **The concept of human dignity**

I will in the following distinguish some ideal typical models of human dignity. Two preliminary remarks are necessary. First, I will refer to different historical models, but it is not my aim to reconstruct an evolution of the concept. Second, It is difficult to identify different models of human dignity by reference to terminology alone. The decisive question would be whether we can find the *concept* in other traditions – in for example Hebrew or Confucian texts – and that is a question of interpretation. Let me now distinguish five ideal typical ways of conceptualizing human dignity.

- (1) *Rank*. Some have reconstructed dignity as primarily linked to a kind of *nobility* or *rank*. 4 In that sense, it is to some extent a concept that marks a distinction: the one who has rank and honour is distinct from those who do not. It is unclear whether this exclusionary aspect is decisive: it is relevant that the honourable person has a dignity which is a reason to treat him or her with respect, and which at the same time forms a reason for him to
- 4 See Chapter 3 by Ober and Chapter 31 by Neuhauser and Stoecker in this volume; and ¨ Waldron (2012).

behave according to this status. However, dignity related to rank does not imply universalizability and is not inalienable – rank may be lost.

- (2) *Virtue and duty*. As early as in ancient times, dignity was seen as a concept of universal nobility, for example in Cicero (1913: I.30: 105–6).5 The universal status of a human, rational being was seen as a reason to behave in accordance with this status. Specific roles are connected to specific duties: similarly to the duties a person has in his quality of father or judge, a human being has duties that are implications of his status as a human being – a being endowed with rational capacities. The content of these obligations is simply to exercise one's rational capacities: a being with dignity should behave in a way that is appropriate to her rational capacities, it should exercise rational control in action, it should master the emotions, it has to stay sober in order to stay in control of himself, in short, it has to behave like a rational being should behave. In that sense, human dignity formulates duties to ourselves, but it is not concerned with the protection of the dignity of the other. There are some obligations towards other human beings involved, but the core of this concept are the duties of the agent to behave according to his status – not the respect for the dignity of the other. This concept is universal but not inalienable: a human being can lose his or her dignity by not living according to his or her duties and it can hardly be reconstructed as the foundation of rights.
- (3) *Dignity and religious status*. Dignity in accordance with the duties of a human being can be translated into various religious contexts. In that case the duties are seen not as a result of our rational nature, but as a result of divine commands; of course, our rational nature is necessary for us to understand those commands and to behave accordingly. In some religious traditions, these divine commands would be the result of divine revelation, which according to some approaches would coincide with our rational insight. The model of human dignity would be comparable to the previous one, differing only in that the duties of the virtuous man are determined on the basis of divine commands. This concept may be universal when religious law is thought to be the valid law for all human beings. And, as with the previous model, dignity may be lost if one does not live up to one's duties. It is impossible here to reconstruct to what extent the religious tradition is related to the development of the human rights concept; however, it is important to point out that there is no conceptually necessary relationship between religious status and respect for human rights.
- (4) *The cosmological status of the human being*. Human dignity can be a concept that refers to the specificity of human beings. Pico della Mirandola would in this sense describe the human being as specifically different from animals (humans are free), from the angels (humans are free and vulnerable) and from God (humans are not perfect). This anthropological self-reflection is
- 5 See Chapter 17 by Luo in this volume.

a kind of interpretation of the role from human beings in the cosmos, which of course would have implications for the political order.6 This cosmological and anthropological speculation can perhaps explain why the human being is an admirable creature, and this insight could be a reason to see him as a creative and curious being, whose nature is linked to the discovery of the world and the creation of new possibilities. But this whole concept has only indirect links to the moral and political dimension. The concept is universal but it does not specifically justify that the human being has rights.

- (5) *Respect for the dignity of the individual human being*. From general considerations about the cosmological or religious status of the human being, the specific idea can be distinguished that each single human individual would have dignity. In this line, human dignity should be seen as an expression that signifies a status which other human beings and political institutions have to respect. This respect can be interpreted primarily in a sense of moral obligations or – as happened in the twentieth century – in the sense of individual rights that can be legally enforced. And since this respect is of immanent importance from a moral point of view, it can be seen as a reason to understand the entire legal and political state and international order as based on the respect for the dignity and rights of each individual human being. This concept of 'human dignity', as opposed to those named above, is *universal*: it signifies a status that cannot be lost, and thus may provide a foundation of rights.
#### **Questions regarding human dignity in the context of the human rights regime**

A first inventory of models shows that there exists a variety of ways in which human dignity may be conceptualized, some close to one specific ideal type and others more mixed. By way of exclusion, one can identify aspects of how human dignity is *not* understood in contemporary discourse: human dignity is not understood in terms of *honour*, it is not about the particular honour of specific beings with dignity (even so, some would think that human dignity would be a kind of universalization of the honour-idea). It is also not a *perfectionist* concept – references to human dignity do not tell us how to live a good, virtuous or excellent life; perhaps it is about securing the necessary precondition of a good life but it is not about the goals of the good life itself. Rather, the scope of ascription of human dignity is *universal* in the sense that it applies to all human beings, it is *egalitarian* insofar as each human being is equal with regard to his dignity and references to human dignity are justifying *duties towards others* that have the form of *categorical* obligations. Under categorical obligations we understand: duties that are overriding with regard to other action-guiding considerations. That does not mean that those duties cannot be weighted against

6 See Chapter 6 by Steenbakkers in this volume; and Trinkaus (1970). other considerations, but that the duties that follow from human dignity can only be weighted against other duties that follow from the respect for human dignity. By emphasizing that human dignity justifies duties to others, I do not exclude the possibility that respect for human dignity may imply duties towards myself as well (as in Kant) but it forms *at least* a ground for strict duties towards others.

But, even thus identified, there exists a broad variety of ways in which the modern concept of dignity may be conceived. In order to understand the differences between various approaches, I would propose to distinguish five questions with regard to which each account should be able to explain its position.

- (1) What is the relationship between human dignity and human rights?
- (2) What is the relationship between a moral and a legal interpretation of human dignity?
- (3) Who has dignity?
- (4) What is the normative content of human dignity?
- (5) What are the necessary presuppositions for a commitment to human dignity?

#### What is the relationship between human dignity and human rights?

If we focus on human dignity approaches within the human rights context, we can distinguish various forms of conceptual relationships between human dignity and human rights.7 The way this relationship is conceptualized determines fundamentally the role of human dignity within the human rights framework. Therefore, I will now present some possibilities of conceptualizing the relation between human dignity and human rights; these considerations would thus be applicable also to a moral and a legal interpretation of human dignity. We can broadly distinguish the interpretation of human dignity as a *right*, as a *norm* and as a *principle*.

If we see human dignity as a *right*, it would be an individual right with a special status. We could think of a right that is to some extent less specific than other rights, a kind of container concept to protect those forms of disrespect for human beings that are not covered by other human rights – a last resort that compensates imperfections in the human rights system. A second option would be to understand it as a right that condemns systematic and structural forms of rights violations so immense that they are not just denials of specific rights, but forms of disrespect for the human being as such. That seems to be the idea behind the critic of instrumentalization or critic of forms of dehumanization (cf. Durig ¨ 1956). But this understanding would just see violations of human dignity

<sup>7</sup> See for this part Duw¨ ell (2010); and, as an antithesis, Chapter 20 by Den Hartogh in this volume.

as violations of a *subcategory* of the most fundamental rights, the normative core of the human rights, for which a stronger form of protection would be required. The question would then be how other rights can be derived from the respect for these fundamental rights: one can, for example, see genocide, slavery and systematic degradations of human beings as deeply immoral without deriving further normative consequences from this insight, like political or social and cultural rights. The idea that rights are derived from human dignity would require that human dignity is different from the human rights in a much more fundamental sense. A third option would be to understand human dignity – in line with Hannah Arendt – as a 'right to have rights'.8 Human dignity would, in this line of thought, be a legitimate claim that each human being has to be a member of a political order that gives her rights as a citizen, a right to inclusion in a legal order. The rights that are granted within the legal order would not be human rights, but legal rights resulting from political struggles. Human dignity would not determine which rights that should be; it would refer to the prior entitlement to have this status of a right-holder at all.

We could also think that human dignity is not a right but a kind of fundamental *norm*that requires respect for humanity in general without an internal link to human rights. This norm would condemn some actions as objective violations of 'humanity'. It would allow for restrictions of rights and liberties for other reasons than direct rights violations. In some contexts, such an understanding is related to the rules of conduct and customs of a specific society. Such a concept could of course be used by all kinds of societal groups to support their particular ideals of human behaviour: dwarf-throwing or peep shows could then be seen as violations of human dignity; likewise it could be a violation of human dignity if unmarried couples live together, if homosexuals have sexual intercourse or if women appear in public without a head-covering. If human dignity as a norm were as under-determined yet nonetheless had overriding power *vis-`a-vis* human rights, it could potentially rule out human rights altogether. This would really be the Trojan horse of the human rights regime.

A third possibility would be to understand human dignity as a *principle* – and I will distinguish two interpretations of such a principle. The generally used concept of 'principle' stems from a bioethical debate and was developed by Beauchamp and Childress (2013). These authors argue that we have to start normative evaluations by referring to several mid-level principles that are generally accepted points of departure in normative discourse. These principles have to be specified in concrete situations and have to be balanced against each other. In some bioethical discussions, human dignity is used in this line: as one principle amongst others. Such an understanding would ignore a conceptual relationship to the human rights and it would not give human dignity the

<sup>8</sup> See Chapter 34 by Menke in this volume. In this direction, see also the considerations about 'a right to justification' in Forst (2012).

status of a concept that overrides other practical considerations and from which rights can be derived. Such a principle would certainly not be the concept of human dignity within the human rights framework. A completely different understanding would conceive 'principle' as *overarching*: such a concept would ascribe worth to human beings that forms the basis for the respect we owe to them. This principle overrides other practical considerations and is categorically binding for all actions. Different from the understanding of mid-level principles, this principle cannot be balanced against other principles and would have a unique status as the primary source of moral and legal obligations. This principle would explain the central position of the human person in the legal order, is guiding for the interpretation of the entire set of human rights, and would see human rights as 'derived' from human dignity – Kant's categorical imperative would be a model for the explanation of such a principle (see also Gewirth 1992).

But would human dignity as a principle in this latter sense only prescribe respect for the rights of individuals? Often it is claimed that human dignity would also protect more general conditions for a human life or that it is related to respect for humanity in general. Would such an interpretation of human dignity be in line with its role as a basis for the human rights? An interpretation could proceed as follows: human beings have human rights because they have human dignity. Human dignity would be the principle to respect human beings in their possibility to live a life appropriate to a being with autonomous capacities. The duties with respect to human dignity are duties to protect the necessary conditions to live a life of an autonomous being. This consideration justifies rights of individuals but it justifies also duties to protect the general conditions that are required for an autonomous life. Those general conditions would have to do with a safe environment and institutions that secure the conditions of a life with dignity. These rights are also of course the rights of each individual but they are to some extent unspecific. Gewirth would speak in this context of 'generic rights' (Gewirth 1978: 64) which would be rights that are necessary for all kind of actions, human beings would need them in general, independently of the concrete goals they may want to achieve. These would not necessarily be the most basic rights in a minimalistic sense (as rights to just the goods that are necessary for survival). It would be rights to conditions of life that make the enjoyment of our goals possible in the first place. If we see human dignity as a commitment to the general conditions that make it meaningful to claim and make use of human rights, we would give human dignity a very fundamental role in the understanding of human rights. The most important consequence is that this understanding would not generate all kinds of collective goods that bypass the individual human being's liberty. It would rather be an emphasis on a commitment to those conditions that make the rights of all individuals possible in the first place.

This short overview of different conceptualizations shows that it is by no means evident what the role of human dignity in the human rights context is: approaches to human dignity need therefore to explicate the conceptual relationship.

#### What is the relationship between a moral and legal interpretation of human dignity?

So far, I have discussed human dignity independently of the distinction between a legal and a moral perspective. Not all traditions of human dignity would see this concept in a legal perspective. The virtue-ethical tradition knows only obligations for the virtuous life. But the modern human rights tradition clearly has a legal dimension. But the legal chapters in this volume demonstrate that legal provisions about 'human dignity' fulfil very different functions in the various legal systems.9 It can be a concept that grants a kind of exceptional protection against the most fundamental rights violations, it can prohibit forms of significant disrespect for human beings, and is seen as the foundational concept of the entire concept of human or civil rights. This exceptional position implies that references to human dignity in normal legal praxis are a kind of last resort. With regard to human dignity as a foundational concept, the default would be not to refer to human dignity so easily. It would, however, be more likely to decide concrete legal questions by reference to specific rights. Human dignity would then particularly be discussed if the interpretation of specific rights, their relative weight, and their interrelationship is at stake on a more fundamental level. We would have to distinguish between this foundational role for the entire corpus of human rights on the one hand and, on the other, for more specific functions, such as an explicit condemnation of various extreme forms of disrespect of human beings (for example, genocide and torture). These specific functions presuppose, however, the foundational understanding of human dignity, because only if respect for the human being is categorically required in general do we have reasons to see these particular forms of denial of respect also as categorically wrong.

This categorical condemnation of disrespect for the human being is not an invention of the UDHR. It is therefore plausible to assume that human dignity has not only a legal origin, but also a moral one. It is important to note that scholars use different understandings of morality in this context: some would see morality as the articulation of a prior specific 'moral position', in the sense that the 'moral point of view' is characterized by independent considerations of the interests of all; by for example the specific morality of the golden rule, or those convictions that are traditionally seen as natural law. These would be attempts to define morality by references to a specific normative content. One can also understand the distinctive feature of morality in a more formal sense. Under that perspective, moral convictions would be distinct from other convictions in that they confront us with requirements for action that we may

9 See Chapter 1 by Brownsword in this volume, and McCrudden (2008). reasonably see as categorically binding. Such a formal definition could deal with the fact that different moral doctrines would present distinct normative content to be obligatory. A chauvinist moral doctrine could be seen as *a* moral doctrine; that does not mean that such a doctrine is a good one, but it belongs to the category of moral doctrines. So, in discussing the relationship between morality and (international) law, it would be important to be aware of the different interpretations of morality.

Many are reluctant to refer to morality in legal discourse, because they hold the view that the legal order must be morally neutral and open to various moral convictions and worldviews. There is, furthermore, a hesitancy to interpret human rights directly as a continuation of the natural rights tradition of the eighteenth century. Some scholars even try to interpret the entire human rights approach only or primarily as a system that has a function via the various human rights instruments in international law, and, resulting from this function, some roles also in political discourses (Beitz 2009).

There are, however, several arguments why human dignity can only be adequately understood – even in the legal context – if one sees the relationship to the moral understanding of the concept. It is difficult to ignore the historical context of implementation: for the UDHR, and also for the many (in particular the German) constitutions, human dignity was introduced after the Second World War, and the moral dimension is hard to dismiss – 'human dignity' is obviously at least partly a moral–political answer to the atrocities of the Shoah and the war (Morsink 1999, Chapter 2). A similar explanation would be relevant for the South African Constitution. In other words, it would be difficult to understand the choice of such a concept and its prominent role in international law, if its legal function were completely independent from the role this concept played in the history of moral philosophy and plays in broadly shared moral intuitions and convictions.

If there is indeed a connection, this could mean that the political–legal would not be neutral but rather based on some moral assumptions. Human dignity would as such articulate the basic moral claim that we should see ourselves as obliged to order the legal and political institutions in such a way that a respect for the dignity of all human beings is secured. That means that the reason why human dignity has such a central place in the legal order is understood as a response to a moral demand. That makes it both plausible and necessary to assess the validity of this demand by moral arguments.

Such a 'moral grounding' of the human rights framework would not imply that one would have to understand the human rights framework as an institutionalization of a set of moral rights, as if the UDHR were a kind of written version of the natural law. One should rather understand the human rights as a legal institution. To see human rights as based on or derived from respect for human dignity would here be the recognition that it is morally required to respect human dignity, to ensure the legal provisions of the human rights would be an institutionalized answer to this moral requirement. In that sense, it would be plausible that different historical and cultural situations ask for different institutionalizations because of the different challenges human dignity is confronted with. On this view, a critic of human rights in general or specific human rights provisions could either question the moral authority of human dignity, could disagree with the perception of challenges human dignity is confronted with, or could question whether the human rights provisions are appropriate institutional means to protect human dignity against these challenges. In any case, one can expect that accounts of human dignity are explicit about the assumed relationship between law and morality.

#### Who has dignity?

So far, we have discussed the conceptual status of human dignity in its relationship to the human rights and in the tensions between the legal and moral dimensions. There are also various questions concerning the subject and the content of human dignity. It may be thought surprising how many debates concern the question of the subject of human dignity.10 The adjective 'human' seemsto suggest an answer to the question to whom we should attribute human dignity, and that answer is: to *all* human beings and *only* to human beings. This answer, however, gave rise to a variety of other questions: what does 'all human beings' precisely mean? When does a human being start to have dignity (with conception, at birth etc.)? And when does it cease to be a being with dignity? Should we see human beings who will never develop rational capacities as beings with dignity? And why should we ascribe this status only to humans? Are not at least some animals worthy of the same respect we owe to human beings?

It would be necessary to explain the criteria we use to determine who has human dignity and how these criteria can be justified. It would further be necessary to determine what that means for the scope of duties corresponding to the respect for human dignity. A first candidate would be: membership in the biological species, *homo sapiens*. This criterion is, however, dubious because it is unclear why membership of a biological species by itself should be a sufficient ground to ascribe the dignity status from which the human rights are derived. Under pragmatic criteria to determine the legal scope of human dignity, the membership in the biological species can play a specific role (since the law would have to work with empirically robust criteria) but this cannot be the justificatory ground for the ascription of the dignity status. Some would just refer to the will of God, but either that is an arbitrary selection simply grounded on a divine decision, or a decision by God that is further elaborated in terms of reasons. Thus, there must be something in the human being that may justify his special status. And, even if we would have reasons to broaden the scope of dignity-holders beyond the species, this extension would have to be justified by

10 See for example Chapter 53 by Graumann and Chapter 58 by Duwell in this volume. ¨

the fact that some animals would share these features with us, or that we at least are uncertain to what extent they do.

Thus, what is it in the human being that makes it plausible that it has the status of a being with dignity? If we refer to features that are distinctly human, we could think about man's curiosity, creativity, or power to use instruments, as features that are preconditions for an understanding of and domination over the world. In line with an honour concept of dignity, these features may indeed be reasons for admiration (or sometimes for fear and anger), but they are not reasons for moral respect. One could also refer to the fact that human beings have interests and needs, are vulnerable, have the capacity to act at all and are able to act morally. All those elements can be constitutive for the possibility of having, granting, respecting or refraining from exercising the rights. Only if human beings have needs and interests, if they care about something, is it reasonable to assume that there may be rights that protect and support them. And at the same time the capacity of agents to respect or disrespect rights is necessary for an understanding of the status of a rights-holder. I do not want to go into all the relevant distinctions of the various rights theories, but it seems evident that those features that are necessary to ascribe the status of a rightsholder are also necessary for the ascription of human dignity. If human rights are derived from human dignity, then the status of human dignity must contain those features that are necessary for the ascription of rights. The possibilities to justify the moral relevance of these features will be discussed in the next chapter.

If we determine the status of a being with dignity as a ground for rights by such features, the question would be how this status would relate to the obligations to other beings, particularly our duties towards animals. The problem may be posed as follows: (a) if dignity is the status ascribed to (living) human beings, (b) if the respect for dignity of human beings implies that they have liberties that can only be limited by the rights of others, and (c) if the obligations we have towards beings with this status are overriding with regard to other action-guiding considerations, then (d) it is not possible to limit the rights of human beings in order to protect animals, nature or something else. The only legitimate form to restrict the rights of human beings in the exercise of their liberties is within this framework the reference to rights of other human beings. We can of course often show that specific goods are necessary for human beings to effectuate their rights; this holds for example for various ecological considerations. We can furthermore show that collective goods demand protection because they have value for human beings. This can perhaps go much beyond the instrumental value that some natural goods have for us: it can for example also include aesthetic values of specific cultural and natural goods or the importance of specific values for the identity of human beings. But it would be problematic to limit the respect for human dignity in favour of other beings that are assumed to have a status of their own.11

11 See Chapter 60 by Heeger and Chapter 61 by Schaber in this volume.

In that case, we would have four conceptual options: (1) we could deny that animals or non-living nature have a status independent from the relevance they have for human beings. In these discussions, the basis on which we ascribe a feature of human dignity would of course be relevant. If we ascribe it on the basis of rational capacities that human beings typically develop, we would of course have to investigate to what extent animals have them. It could be the case that with regard to some animals (for example, some apes or dolphins) we are quite uncertain about their capacities. This could be a reason to treat them with the same respect as human beings for precautionary reasons. (2) We could ascribe the dignity status independently of rational capacities and include (at least some) animals. We would have to discuss the basis of the grounds on which beings would have dignity, and which animals would fall inside the scope of the protection afforded by human dignity. This ascription would result in severe changes in the application of the human rights. Their status would then be the same as that of human beings. (3) We could ascribe a different moral status to animals than we do to human beings, which would force us to assume that the exercise of rights by human beings can be restricted by considerations that fall outside the regime of human rights. This would imply that human rights and human dignity are not overriding, which again would change the very nature of the human rights approach. We would have to discuss under what circumstances it would be permissible to restrict human rights due to other considerations. That would imply that respect for human dignity from which the rights are derived would sometimes not be categorically required. (4) We could introduce a kind of graduated concept: moral status may come in degrees. That would mean that we would assume that (living) human beings would have the full status of human dignity with all the rights following from that, while we would ascribe another (lower) moral status to animals (and perhaps also to human embryos: see below). For developing such an approach, two questions need to be answered. First, on the basis of what capacities do we ascribe animals a specific moral status? Animals purportedly lack rationality or for example the capacity to envisage future existence, but on the basis of which capacities ought we to grant them respect? Second, we would have to formulate rules that explicate in which cases the status of an animal may overrule respect for beings with human dignity: when must respect for human dignity be limited to protect that of an animal?

Such questions do not arise only with regard to animals. Most of the discussions in the literature deal with the questions of when the required status of a being with dignity begins, when it ends and what is the status of human beings who have lost or will never develop rational capacities. We can either assume that the ascription of human dignity is independent of those capacities that we typically find within human beings (then the question would be on basis of which features we would ascribe dignity at all and why a human being deserves another form of respect than a stone or a bicycle), or we can assume that there are reasons to include human beings before birth or those with severe mental disabilities within the protection we owe to human persons. There are various arguments brought forward for justifying such an inclusion. Some of the arguments are more pragmatic in nature, such as lack of knowledge about human capacities and the need for precautionary ways of dealing with this problem. Other arguments are more fundamental, such as arguments that claim that potential persons should be treated with the same respect we owe to human persons. I discuss these arguments in more detail in Chapter 58 below.

A further question would be to what extent the *human species would have dignity as such*, whether there is something like collective dignity. Human dignity within the human rights framework ascribes this specific status to each human being. But, in doing so, it is assumed that it is morally fundamentally important to have those features that are characteristic of beings with dignity. In that sense, the ascription involves a general evaluative judgment about the importance of being human. There are furthermore some goods relevant for all agents. For example, some ecological conditions have to be fulfilled in order to enable human beings to live an autonomous life. Therefore, the right to have those goods preserved may be a very important part of the human rights regime that would even affect the possibility of living human life on Earth in general. Here, the rights of all individuals are at stake and not just those of specific individuals. In any case, we cannot interpret a concept of the 'dignity of the species' or of 'collective dignity' independently of the dignity of individual human beings.

The question as to who has dignity plays a fundamental role in all kinds of debates – from abortion and euthanasia, animal ethics, to sustainability and future generations. The variety of discussions in which the question adopts a prominent role makes it difficult to develop an encompassing concept of human dignity in an uncontroversial manner – but also all the more urgent.

#### What is the normative content of human dignity?

While the previous section discussed who has dignity, the current section will deal with the question what kind of obligations would follow from the required respect for human dignity. In the current debate it is often assumed that human dignity is an empty concept: various groups can give very diverse meanings to it, verdicts that see participation in dwarf-throwing or peep shows as violations of human dignity seem to support this view. Others assume that talking about human dignity is redundant because it would not have any meaning that goes beyond what 'respect for autonomy' would require (Macklin 2003). However, those critics normally only demonstrate that the concept is used in different and often arbitrary ways – and what better reason is there for a *more* philosophical investigation. To say that the concept is empty or useless would require an argument that makes it plausible that there are no conceptual *possibilities* to enlighten the content of this concept in a non-arbitrary way.

What would be required to determine the normative content of human dignity in terms of criteria that allow for determining those obligations that follow from respect for human dignity? In light of the above discussion, we could say: if we were to understand human dignity as an 'open norm', the normative content of human dignity would depend on the image of appropriate behaviour (the cultural customs or habits) that is upheld in a specific society. If human dignity is understood as the right to the status of a citizen (the right to have rights), the normative content of human dignity would simply entail granting this status. If human dignity were understood as a normative prohibition against completely reducing a human being to an object, this would probably imply merely obligations to ensure that very extreme forms of humiliation and degradation cannot happen; the scope of the corresponding obligations would be quite limited (see above).

But what if we understand human dignity as a principle that determines the entire content of the human rights? This obviously touches upon our whole understanding of human rights, and it is therefore impossible to discuss this comprehensively, but I will mention some aspects.

First, we would have to ask what kind of concept of rights we presuppose. With regard to the traditional distinctions of Hohfeld (1964), it seems quite obvious that those kinds of rights that human dignity would justify are *claim rights* (in opposition to privileges, powers or immunities), that is, rights that are strictly correlated to duties on the side of others. But what is the content of these rights? We can distinguish an *interest concept of rights* from a *will concept of rights* (Hart 1955). An interest theory would see rights as protecting a (basic) interest of all human beings. Interest theories may be further distinguished with regard to the scope of the interest they would see as justifications for rights. A will theory would protect the control of the agent over himself. With regard to those theories, we could further distinguish between concepts that would only give a right to the agent not to be infringed upon by others in the exercise of his will, from others that would also protect those conditions that are necessary for him to do so. With regard to human dignity, one could for example wonder whether rape or genocide are dignity violations because some basic interests of the dignity-holder are denied, or rather because she is treated with disrespect as a person with the capacity to decide about herself. It is contested to what extent approaches of human dignity are compatible with all kinds of rights accounts.

A *second* question would be whether respect for dignity would only require respect for the *negative rights* of the dignity-holder or for *positive rights* as well.12 Whatever it is a right-holder has a right to, negative rights would impose a duty on others to refrain from interfering with these rights, while positive rights would impose a duty on them also to support the right-holder. If I had a right to develop my basic intellectual capacities, a negative right would oblige others not to interfere with this development, while a positive right would also create an obligation to give me assistance, for example by education. Both kinds of rights have corresponding obligations, but there may be asymmetries: with regard to

12 For this distinction, see in particular Gewirth (1996; 31–70). See also Shue (1996).

negative rights, each agent has obligations, while from the viewpoint of positive rights, this may be a topic of discussion. And with regard to positive rights, there may also be debate on the degrees of required support. Some usages of the concept of human dignity see respect for human dignity simply as requiring protection of a minimal threshold of basic interests or the most fundamental capacity as an agent. The idea that human dignity is the basis of human rights would, however, entail that the whole range of rights provisions would be a consequence of the protection of human dignity; if we relate that to the existing human rights regime this would include a variety of positive rights.

If human rights are derived from the respect for human dignity, one could wonder whether all rights-provisions have the same importance for the protection of human dignity. It does not seem plausible to assume that the right to education has here the same relevance as the provisions against torture. While torture will probably affect the core of the personality of the dignity-holder in a central and irreversible way, lack of access to education reduces the opportunities of the agent in a severe way but is not comparably irreversible and devastating. There may thus be a hierarchy of rights (some rights are more urgent and important than others) and it may be that we are entitled to weigh some rights against each other while other rights should not be weighed at all or weighed only to a very limited degree. Gewirth has made a proposal for such a hierarchy (1978 and 1992). He proposed viewing human dignity as a ground for the rights to the necessary conditions to live a life of one's own. This approach presupposes a will theory of rights, so the agent should be seen as capable of controlling his own life. He should be seen as having the right to exercise his own will as well as to develop his own capacities in a way that he has the ability to choose and realize important goals for himself. Rights are in that sense the protection of the necessary conditions for the possibility to live and flourish as an agent. This would imply negative and positive rights, it would include rights to empowerment to live a life of one's own. But, within the rights, Gewirth would see a specific hierarchy that is justified by the *different degrees of necessity* of the respective rights for the maintenance and development of this basic ability. One is a level of *most basic rights*: I must be alive, must have access to food and sometimes healthcare and must have some basic control over myself in order to live a life of my own. If others influence these basic conditions of my life, the respect for my dignity requires that they refrain from intervening negatively and help me if they are able to do so. There are other, less basic levels of rights. Gewirth would distinguish next-to-basic rights, those rights that are important to *maintain* the capacities I have in order to reach the goals of my life, and rights that are important to *develop my capacities further*. Between these different levels of rights, he would assume a *hierarchy* in the sense that some rights are more fundamental to protect the dignity of a human being due to the necessity of the goods in question to live a life of my own. Gewirth would not assume that such a hierarchy is fixed, but that these distinctions would help to determine in a context-specific sense the relative weight of the concrete rights. This would provide an understanding of human dignity that allows for a structure of the human rights in terms of importance and urgency. The systematic question for other approaches to human dignity would be whether they would assume that all rights deriving from human dignity have the same level of importance, or whether they would propose an alternative hierarchy – which then obviously is in need of justification.

The normative content of human dignity would be concretized by human rights, and those rights would be grounds for obligations on the side of the duty-bearer. To determine who the duty-bearer is, is not a simple question. There are some obvious cases: for example if I have a right to life, nobody has the right to kill me (except in the case of self-defence etc.). But there are various cases wherein it is not so clear who the carrier of the corresponding obligations is. It seems at least plausible that the ability to grant protection plays a crucial role in the determination of possible duty-bearers.

In the case of the human rights, the general understanding of the human rights regime presupposes that the corresponding obligations lie with the state, that is required to realize the obligations following from the rights of human beings. This follows from the very nature of the human rights law as based on contracts between states. If, however, we assume that human rights are based on moral assumptions, and if we assume that this moral ground of the human rights is the reason why the human rights law has been installed in the first place, then the human rights are based on a set of moral convictions which involve obligations to individuals as well as other collective actors than states alone.

A further remark is necessary with regard to the idea that the human rights are 'derived' from human dignity. It could evoke the idea of a deduction or specification: it might be thought that the human rights could be best determined by a philosopher who would just think hard enough to derive a comprehensive set of human rights from the concept of human dignity. Such an understanding would, however, neglect that the rights are responses to possible or probable context-embedded threats. In this sense, human rights can, will and must change over time.

There are at least five factors that are important for the determination of new rights:

- (1) Respect for and protection of *human dignity forms the normative basis* of the entire human rights regime.
- (2) *Changes in the needs, desires and vulnerabilities* of human beings are factors that may affect the perspective under which their dignity can be violated. My possibility of seeing myself as an agent that is able to control myself will depend on various cultural-dependent factors.
- (3) There may be new threats to living a life in dignity. Examples are climate change or the possibilities in the digital world that may change the living conditions so severely that a life in dignity is threatened in new ways.

Climate change may endanger the possibility to live an autonomous life in whole parts of the Earth.

- (4) There are also new forms of *possible protections* of human dignity. The possibilities of the Internet can create new opportunities for rights-fulfilments (for example, by enabling people to be a more competent actor).
- (5) The possible duty-bearers can change by for example the evolution of new (international or global) institutions that have new abilities to protect human beings.

The list of human rights (in a moral as well as in a legal sense) will never be complete, and it would never have been expected that we would be able in 1948 to outline a list of rights that would be valid until the end of the world. If there are new threats to human beings, for example by changes in the financial system or by changes in the natural environment, it would be immoral not to respond to these threats by establishing new forms of protection. But, to hold the moral authority of the human rights, it would be necessary for us to be able to interpret these changes not just as a reflection of changes in power relationships but as new forms of protection of human dignity. In that sense, human dignity would function as the normative basis of the human rights that is necessary for the moral integrity of the human rights process as such.

#### What are the necessary presuppositions for a commitment to human dignity?

A last set of considerations is related to the question to what extent a commitment to human dignity depends on specific conceptions of nature, individuality, rationality, religion and time that are culturally contingent. And would not such dependencies be a challenge for the universality of human dignity? The development of the concept of human dignity in Western history could be an indicator for this. It is therefore relevant in a systematic, philosophical discussion to reflect on the necessary presuppositions of the concept.

One candidate for a culturally contingent but perhaps necessary presupposition would be the assumption that we need a religious horizon in order to understand why the human person is sacrosanct. Such a religious genealogy could, however, only explain that there are some elements seen as sacrosanct in a religious worldview at all, but we would need additional explanations for the ascriptions of rights to the human person. One could try to reconstruct ideas of natural rights in developments in the late middle age by criticism of religious authorities.13 But those reconstructions would not affect a possible universality in the ascription of human rights because it is quite possible to develop insights into the worth of human beings in other contexts as well. It could be that

13 See Tuck (1979); and Chapter 4 by Imbach and Chapter 5 by Mieth in this volume.

there are some elements in the Christian tradition that are also necessary for an understanding of the rights-approach of human dignity. Candidates could be a linear conception of history and time (as opposed to a circular understanding) that would be needed to understand the importance that is given to the singular individual that is understood in such a way that it cannot be substituted by another individual. Another genealogy14 would connect the concept of human dignity inherently to ideas central to modernity. Human dignity would ascribe a status to human beings as persons with equal individual rights, the opportunity to develop economically, governed by a state that is acknowledged by all citizens and ensures those rights by an effective legal system.

I would propose three kinds of methodological considerations that would be helpful to relate those genealogical approaches to the systematic discussion about the moral and legal role of human dignity:

- (1) To assess the plausibility of these genealogies, it would be decisive to what extent they can explain the concept of human dignity in all its dimensions. A reconstruction of the central role of the individual in eighteenth-century culture, as Hunt (2007) presented it, can for example not explain how the development of this idea is related to the justification of government as the human rights regime aims to do. And a functionalistic reconstruction of the role of the individual within the modern differentiated society can as such not explain that all human beings and not only all citizens are declared to have dignity. As such, the plausibility of those reconstructions should be measured by the degree to which they can explain the dependency of the core conceptual elements of human dignity in a sociological and historical perspective. The further question would be whether those reconstructed evolutions in the development of a concept of human dignity would exclude that in other cultural contexts other evolutions are possible. It is quite plausible to assume that we 'discovered' the unconditional worth of the human being after the atrocities of the Shoah, but why should that be the only way of gaining this insight?
- (2) It is obviously plausible that a commitment to human dignity is not neutral with regard to the institutions that are accompanied by it. Human dignity may indeed be necessarily linked to a state that is characterized by a distinction between the private and public sphere, equality before the law, formalized contractual relationships, the rule of law, and that each individual has rights to decide about fundamental aspects of his life etc. If those elements are necessary features of a society based on human dignity, this may be interpreted in two ways: either it can be seen to indicate that only societies with those features will develop a concept of human dignity, or it can be a reason to assume that a commitment to human dignity implies

<sup>14</sup> See for this context Chapter 19 by Lindemann in this volume, Jellinek 1901 and Hunt 2007.

the moral obligation to organize the society according to these features. Whether the universal obligation in the latter sense is valid would precisely depend on the question whether we are able to justify that human beings have a right to live in such societies.

- (3) If we interpret the societal and legal consequences that would follow from a commitment to human dignity, it is not self-evident that these consequences are necessarily coherent or even compatible with the way in which modern societies are designed. If the commitment to human dignity implies a moral commitment to secure the conditions necessary for living an autonomous life, we may raise many questions with regard to contemporary societies. Would this commitment to human dignity not imply a requirement to make all reasonable efforts to realize at least decent standards of living on a global scale and to secure the conditions for future generations to live their own life? One could even be suspicious that in Western society human rights are just functionalized to secure the welfare prospects of the richer part of the world. It seems quite obvious that the traditional nation-state would not be the institutional setting that can secure the moral requirements a commitment to human dignity would ask from us. The question what institutions and what kind of a society and culture would fulfil those requirements, is still open.
So accounts of human dignity would have to investigate to what extent their plausibility depends on culturally specific presuppositions. If we can justify the universality of the claim to live in societies that are able to protect the possibility of each human being to live an autonomous life or to live under conditions in which he or she can flourish, the question would arise what kind of political, civil and legal institutions would be required to ensure this possibility.

#### **Towards an ethics of human dignity**

Against the background of the conceptual aspects I discussed above, I want to outline some of the questions in moral philosophy an ethics of human dignity would have to deal with. I assume here, as discussed above, that the legal concept of human dignity is grounded in a moral concept and that such a moral concept is in need of conceptual explanation and justification. I will now outline some of the philosophical challenges of this concept.

#### The ontological status of human dignity

It was often said that there is a tension between the idea that we cannot lose human dignity but that it can be violated. Why should we protect human dignity if it cannot be lost? Is human dignity a property we have that may be endangered and in need of protection, or is it a claim we have against others? In the latter case, we should interpret the proposition 'human beings have human dignity' as 'we are categorically obliged to treat human beings with respect'. If human beings have dignity in this sense, their claim to be treated with respect can be violated, but the normative claim to be treated with respect will still be valid; as long as someone is a human being, he ought to be treated with respect. There are two kinds of reservations against such a reading. The first would be the concern that we endanger the unconditional respect we owe to human beings by seeing it as an *ascription*. If human dignity is something we ascribe, it may be thought to lose some of its normative force because it is a matter of choice – and thus to an extent arbitrary – whether we ascribe dignity to someone or not. This is, however, not necessary. One could reply to this consideration that it is of course possible that an ascription must not be an arbitrary ascription. It is also possible that there is a moment of decision involved (human beings have to decide to grant each other the status as a being with dignity) but that this ascription is rationally necessary (we cannot understand ourselves consistently as agents if we do not make this ascription).

A second reservation against the idea of an ascription concerns the phenomenological plausibility: we experience the other as confronting us with a claim to respect him, we experience in ourselves a disposition to treat other people with respect. Reflecting on the question 'ought I to treat another with respect?' might be an example of the notorious 'one thought too many'. In line with Ricœur or Levinas, one could say: the phenomenology of moral experi- ´ ences confronts us with the worth of the other,15 the other has some authority over us that is the origin of the respect we owe to him. One can accept that there is such a phenomenological experience, so that human beings see themselves on a pre-reflexive level confronted with the claim of respect. But it is disputable whether the phenomenological experience makes it superfluous to reflect on the reasons we have to ascribe this status to human beings. The pre-reflexive experience may confront us with a strong experiential force to embrace the conviction that human beings have to be treated with respect, but it is not clear why the pre-reflexive experience urges us to affirm the unconditional worth of human beings as an ultimate commitment. As rational beings, we can reflect on this status of human dignity, and, moreover: phenomenological experience alone cannot account for the insight that it would be right, obligatory and important to ascribe this status to each other.

#### A normative theory of human dignity

Since respect for human dignity cannot be overridden by other practical considerations, a normative theory of human dignity must be able to account

<sup>15</sup> See in this context Chapter 29 by Atterton and Chapter 30 by Junker-Kenny in this volume.

for categorical obligations. This makes it dubious whether we can think of it in terms of (long-term) self-interest: seeing moral norms as based in shared self-interest would make respect for the other conditional in the sense that we should respect the interest of the other as long as it coincides with our own interest (at least in the long run). As far as it is employed in terms of social contract theory, human dignity would be a form of social contract that would not justify the social contract in terms of self-interest, but would see the social contract as grounded in obligations to respect each individual. Typically, one would think that a deontological theory would be appropriate for the conceptualization of such a form of respect; unconditional worth or human dignity would even be the standard examples for deontological concepts. But there is a problem if we conceptualize deontological normative theories as opposed to consequentialist theories (for example, Pettit 1977). The distinctive feature of these theories is that consequentialist theories would define the moral right (that which is morally obligatory) in terms of the consequences of our actions alone, while deontological theories would define the moral right not solely, or not at all, in terms of consequences (for example, good motives, good intentions or God's will). A consequentialist theory would therefore claim that those actions that bring about the best consequences are morally obligatory, while deontological theories would determine the obligatory actions not solely, or not at all, on the basis of their consequences. If human dignity were a deontological concept in that sense, it would be difficult to spell it out in terms of human rights; to see those actions as morally obligatory which consequences (probably) respect the requirements of human rights. This would thus imply that the right actions are determined in terms of the consequences of our actions: we should always choose those actions whose consequences respect the rights of others.

But there is another option to conceptualize a deontological ethics, which we find in Frankena (1973). Frankena introduces the opposition between deontological and teleological forms of ethics. Frankena defined teleological ethics by seeing the moral right (our moral obligations) as a function of a non-morally good (Frankena 1973: 14). Standard cases for such a theory would be classical hedonistic utilitarianism or welfarism that would claim that we are morally obliged to act such that the overall happiness would be maximized. In such a theory, the moral right would be defined in terms of a non-moral good (happiness). 'Non-moral' does not mean that it is immoral (morally wrong) to be happy, but rather that happiness is a good independently of whether we see ourselves as obliged to strive for it; it is simply a good that we naturally want to achieve. While – in Frankena's terms – a teleological ethics sees the moral obligation as a function of the non-moral good, a deontological ethics does not. In that sense, it is possible to see ourselves as morally obliged to do our duty even if the fulfilment of the duty does not maximize happiness. In the latter sense we should understand human dignity as a deontological concept since the respect for the other is seen as a highest principle. This respect cannot be conceptualized in terms of maximalization and naturally not in terms of maximalization of happiness. If we have to respect the will of the people and if we ensure that they can act as free agents, then it is not evident that this action supports overall happiness in the world; at least happiness is not the ultimate measure for the rightness of our action.

If we see human dignity within the field of normative theories, we could say that it is a deontological concept insofar as it forms the ground for categorical obligations that trump other practical considerations, and human dignity is not functional to the maximalization of a non-moral good. But at the same time the concept is not necessarily non-consequentialist in the sense that the moral right is determined by the consequences of our actions alone: only the consequences of our actions for the rights of others are decisive if respect for the other agent is of overriding importance for the human dignity approach. This does not exclude the possibility that human dignity will imply more obligations than just to respect the rights of the other, for example obligations towards ourselves or the obligations to develop or cultivate specific virtues, obligations that would go beyond the scope of consequentialist considerations. In light of the role of human dignity within the human rights framework, it would be controversial to assume that human dignity would not take the consequences of our action into account. But the main problem of this whole debate is connected to conceptual ambiguities in the use of the concepts 'deontological', 'consequentialist' or 'teleological' ethics.

#### Justification of human dignity

Respect for human dignity imposes categorical obligations upon us. This claim is so important that it overrides other practical considerations and forms the basis of the legitimation of the political order. But how can we justify this claim? If we understand human dignity as a concept that legitimizes a distinct moral order, an order that ascribes equal moral status to all human beings and that claims to be universally valid, then we must admit that this claim is factually contested: that it is not intuitively plausible to everybody. A justification thus seems to be necessary. If human dignity is understood as a moral principle from which other moral insights can be derived (as rights and more concrete principles or rules), it seems difficult to see a justification along the lines of a particularistic approach that rejects the role of principles altogether (Dancy 2004). Approaches that have room only for mid-level principles face similar difficulties (Beauchamp and Childress 2013), as well as pluralistic approaches that have a non-reducible plurality of moral principles that forbid for example killing or lying. Those approaches have a plurality of moral principles that have to be weighed against each other in moral judgments, and thus they cannot account for the *overriding* authority of human dignity. Of course, such a plurality of principles can be understood as the specification of human dignity in particular contexts, but we cannot understand human dignity in line with those principles. I will now shortly discuss three candidates for an ethical account of human dignity.

If we have in mind that human dignity was introduced in the UDHR as a concept on which different worldviews could agree, one might think that the overlapping consensus of Rawls' *Political Liberalism* (1995) could form a helpful model. Human dignity would then have to be interpreted in line with a consensus between different worldviews. As a consequence, we should not try to elaborate a philosophical account of this concept, but should try to understand it from the political practices where the dignity of human beings is contested. Such an account would have the advantage that it would give room for a diversity of ways to access the concept, and that it would account for the genuinely political nature of struggles about human dignity. But one might wonder whether we can develop it as a critical concept that can account for the specific idea of human dignity as a foundation of human rights.

Another possibility that seems to offer a justification for the overriding authority and universality of the concept would be a justification in terms of a *moral realism*, that would see the authority of moral concept as based in a subject-independent concept of a moral truth. A strong concept of moral truth could indeed guarantee the universality of the concept. Such a realist concept, however, most probably has a disadvantage: it is quite likely that the moral truths could only be justified in an intuitive manner, that is, by referring to some form of insight we have without further rational justification. Such an intuitive approach would, however, be quite implausible with regard to human dignity. We may perhaps have a kind of generally shared intuition that it is wrong to kill people or that it is good to tell the truth. But it is very implausible to assume that human beings generally share intuitions with regard to the concept of human dignity as it is presupposed within the human rights framework.

A third possibility would elaborate the universality of human dignity by a *transcendental or reflexive justification*. Such a justification would understand the specific status of human dignity by reference to our status as beings that have the capacity to set goals, and are the sources of moral responsibility. A transcendental or self-reflective justification would show that the agent cannot deny himself the status of a right-holder without contradicting himself. This strategy has been defended by Kant, Gewirth (1978) and Korsgaard (1996).16 Such a strategy would make plausible that we ascribe human dignity to ourselves simply in our quality of being a (moral) agent, and, because what we morally evaluate are the *capacities* necessary for action at all, we are obliged to ascribe the dignity status to every being in possession of these capacities. Such an approach claims universal validity for the concept of human dignity without claiming a subject-independent moral truth.

<sup>16</sup> See Chapter 22 by Hill, Chapter 23 by Kerstein and Chapter 24 by Beyleveld in this volume.

#### **Tasks for further research**

This short introduction aimed at an overview of the scope of questions one is confronted with if one focuses on human dignity as the foundational concept of the human rights regime. The different chapters of this handbook will focus on various aspects of the problem. I want to conclude this introduction by focusing on some research questions which I submit require further investigation. The list is of course not complete:

- (1) A *history of human dignity* in the sense of an *Ideengeschichte* needs to be written. Such a history faces at least a double task: it needs to reconstruct the development of the ideas of human rights in the West, and combine it with an understanding and legitimation of modern political institutions. This would have to be related to the main ideas in the conceptual developments of human dignity. It would be important to understand how the perfectionistic, virtue-ethical tradition relates to the modern rights-oriented concept.
- (2) It would be important to *reconstruct the underlying assumptions* that are necessary for an ethics of human dignity. Is the potential commitment to the principle of human dignity dependent on specific concepts of individuality, on the relationship between the individual and the state, on specific forms of states, on specific views on religion, time and history etc.? If human dignity articulates the basis for protection of the rights of the individual, is this protection only possible in specific forms of a liberal society? Do we need specific social systems or specific institutions in order to protect human dignity effectively? Is protection of human dignity dependent on the specific modern idea of a nation-state with his institutions? Or can we think about a diversity of institutions as an articulation of the commitment to human dignity?
- (3) The latter questions are necessary for a conceptual and philosophical guided discussion about the *relationship between the rights-centred concept of human dignity to non-European or non-Western traditions*. Such investigations are only possible on the basis of a conceptual understanding of the necessary underlying assumptions of the concept.
- (4) A comprehensive investigation into the possibilities of a *philosophical conceptualization and justification* of human dignity would be necessary. That would also include an understanding of the guiding principles for the use of the concept within the application of the human rights framework. For reaching this goal, a discussion of the underlying assumptions as described under (2) and (3) would be particularly important.

#### **References**

- Beauchamp, T. L., and Childress, J. F. 2013. *Principles of Biomedical Ethics*. 7th edn, Oxford University Press
Beitz, C. 2009. *The Idea of Human Rights*. Oxford University Press

- Brownsword, R. 2003. 'Bioethics Today, Bioethics Tomorrow: Stem Cell Research and the "Dignitarian Alliance"', *Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy* 17: 15–51
- Cicero, M. Tullius. 1913. *De officiis*, ed. and trans. W. Miller. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Dancy, J. 2004. *Ethics Without Principles*. Oxford University Press
- Durig, G. ¨ 1956. 'Der Grundrechtssatz von der Menschenwurde', ¨ *Archiv des ¨offentlichen Rechts* 81: 117–56
- Duwell, M. ¨ 2010. 'Human Dignity and Human Rights', in P. Kaufmann, H. Kuch, C. Neuhauser and E. Webster (eds.). ¨ *Humiliation, Degradation, Dehumanization – Human Dignity Violated*. Dordrecht: Springer, 215–30
- Forst, R. 2012. *The Right to Justification*. New York: Columbia University Press
- Frankena, W. K. 1973. *Ethics*. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
- Gewirth, A. 1978. *Reason and Morality*. Chicago University Press
	- 1992. 'Human Dignity as the Basis of Rights', in M. J. Meyer and W. A. Parent (eds.). *The Constitution of Rights: Human Dignity and American Values*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 10–28
	- 1996. *Community of Rights*. Chicago University Press
- Hart, H. L. A. 1955. 'Are There Any Natural Rights?', *Philosophical Review* 64(2): 175– 91
- Hohfeld, W. N. 1964. *Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning*. 3rd edn, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
- Hunt, L. 2007. *Inventing Human Rights: A History*. New York, London: Norton
- Jellinek, G. 1901. *The Declaration of the Rights of Men and Citizens: A Contribution to Modern Constitutional History*, trans. M. Farrand. New York: Holt (online edition, http://oll.libertyfund.org/index)
- Kant, I. 1996. *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. M. Gregor, in *Immanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press
- Kemp, P., Rendtorff, J., and Johansen, N. M. (eds.). 2000.*Bioethics and Biolaw*, vol. II, *Four Ethical Principles*. Copenhagen: Rhodos International Science and Art Publishers and Centre for Ethics and Law
- Korsgaard, C. M. 1996. *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*. Cambridge University Press
- Macklin, R. 2003. 'Dignity as a Useless Concept', *British Medical Journal* 327: 1419–20
- McCrudden, C. 2008. 'Human Dignity and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights', *European Journal of International Law* 19(4): 655–724
- Morsink, J.1999. *The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Drafting and Intent*. University of Philadelphia Press
- Pettit, P. 1977. 'The Consequentialist Perspective', in M. W. Baron, P. Pettit and M. Slote (eds.), *Three Methods of Ethics: A Debate*. Oxford: Blackwell, 92–174
- President's Council on Bioethics. 2008. *Human Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President's Council on Bioethics*. Washington, DC, http://bioethics. georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/human dignity/chapter14.html
- Rawls, J. 1993. *Political Liberalism*. New York: Columbia University Press
- Shue, H. 1996. *Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and US Foreign Policy*. Princeton University Press
- Trinkaus, C. 1970. *In Our Image and Likeness: Humanity and Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought*. Chicago University Press
- Tuck, R. 1979. *Natural Rights Theories: Their Origin and Development*. Cambridge University Press
- Waldron, J. 2012. *Dignity, Rank and Rights*, ed. M. Dan-Cohen. Oxford University Press