

---

### **Part I** Origins of the concept in European history

### Meritocratic and civic dignity in Greco-Roman antiquity

JOSIAH OBER

Jeremy Waldron (2012) has pointed out conceptual similarities between the Kantian conception of universal human dignity as intrinsic and rights-generating, and an older conception of dignity as high standing. Waldron suggests that human dignity generalizes to all humanity the high standing formerly reserved for a privileged few. This chapter suggests that our understanding of dignity would benefit from attention to an intermediate stage: civic dignity, equal high standing among citizens, as it was practiced in classical Athens. Attending to how civic dignity was protected by coordinated citizen action in Athens reminds us that individuals are secure in their dignity only when others are willing and able to defend it. This chapter distinguishes rights-based human dignity from two predecessor forms in the ancient Greco-Roman world: meritocratic and civic dignity. Ancient conceptions of dignity must be understood in light of three assumptions, common to Greek and Roman ethical thought. First, the fundamental question of ethics is what it is for a life to go well. Second, because humans are social beings, as a practical matter ethics is inseparable from politics. Third, we understand politics better when we attend to history.1

#### **Dignity as non-humiliation and non-infantilization**

For the Greeks and Romans, living with dignity meant, figuratively and literally, holding one's head up in the company of others and being properly acknowledged by them. This entails having one's claims recognized by others, having their respect, having some measure of control over one's life, having a say in decisions and having responsibility for one's choices. Like liberty, which has been variously defined by contemporary theorists as 'non-interference' (Berlin 1969) or 'non-domination' (Skinner 1998; Pettit 1997), Greco-Roman conceptions of dignity may best be expressed by what they stand against: dignity can be defined as *non-humiliation* and *non-infantilization*. We suffer indignity – humiliation and/or infantilization – when our public presence goes unacknowledged, when we cringe before the powerful, when we are unduly subject to the paternalistic

1 For a fuller discussion of the arguments presented here, see Ober 2012.

will of others and when we are denied the opportunity to employ our reason and voice in making choices that affect us.

Greco-Roman dignity, meritocratic and civic alike, was a social value and could not be reduced to an internal state of the individual. Dignity is, on this view, a matter of the respect we accord to one another. It is because we live in communities, structured by rules, that the ethical question about lives going well became a question for political theory. From this perspective, the best political regime is the one that provides the best conditions for lives to go well – including the preservation of dignity. Dignity that is held in common by an extensive yet bounded body of citizens stands between the personality and exclusivity of meritocratic dignity and the impersonality and universality of human dignity. Moreover, once it is established among citizens, civic dignity may provide a bridge from meritocratic to human dignity, by facilitating the recognition that everyone has an interest in living with dignity.

#### **Meritocratic dignity**

Meritocratic *dignity*was not a formal theory but a basic set of social practices that was partially canonized in custom and law. Meritocratic dignity is best construed as respect and recognition accorded to persons of high standing, with that high standing arising from the exclusive possession of characteristics regarded by relevant observers as meritorious. High standing is sustained by personalized relations: family, friendship, patronage and enmity determine where one stands and how one is treated. Meritocratic dignity is most clearly manifest in archaic societies. The society depicted in Homeric epic provides a model case in that the distinguishing features of meritocratic dignity – its grounding in personal relations and the fragility of equality at the top – are starkly to the fore.

In a system of meritocratic dignity, my dignity or lack thereof is determined by the place I hold in a hierarchy of merit, and on others' acknowledgment that I am worthy of that place. Meritocratic dignity admits of equality among those of equally high rank. Yet true equality is acknowledged *only* among those who are equal in every relevant particular. In Homeric society, this included ancestry, military prowess, number of retainers and wealth. Equality among elites is precarious because there is limited room at the top and because the ultimate goal is to excel, to be 'best'. The fraught question, 'who is the best of the Achaeans?' (Agamemnon because he commands most men? Achilles because he is the greatest warrior?) drives the action of the *Iliad* (Nagy 1979). The question of pre-eminence can only be answered contingently, based on changing contexts and ongoing competitions. In the inherently agonistic system of meritocratic dignity, recognition arises from vertical relationships, from structured inequality and patronage. Those beneath me in the hierarchy offer me their deference: they recognize my superiority, as I offer deference to and recognize the superiority of those above me. Cooperative relations among persons of similarly high rank (for example, Agamemnon and Achilles) are always threatened by ongoing contests seeking to establish who is best.

Meritocratic dignity is a scarce social resource and it is distributed by highstakes contests. Establishing and preserving my dignity is ultimately my own responsibility. I must be able to demonstrate that I deserve my place and only those with whom I have a strong personal relationship (for example, my kinsmen and my clients: Agamemnon's brother or Achilles' Myrmidons) will help me to defend it. Because my dignity is fragile, I must remain vigilantly on guard against slights and affronts, as others seek to increase their social standing at my expense. I must be ready to protect my dignity against any hint of presumed superiority from those I regard as my peers. As a result, social interaction among elites in Homeric society was marked by incessant feuding, dueling and flyting (Martin 1989).

Threats also arise from below and so I must enforce deference from those beneath me on the social scale. Society is therefore characterized by systematic expressions of disrespect (sometimes ritualized and sometimes violent) towards inferiors, who must be 'kept in their place' if they are not to threaten the standing of those above them (cf. Odysseus' beating of Thersites in Book II of the *Iliad*). Well-known ancient examples of how meritocratic dignity leads to political crisis include Achilles' catastrophic anger (motivated by Agamemnon's appropriation of his war-prize) in the *Iliad* and Julius Caesar's choice in 49 BC to overthrow the Roman Republic rather than to accept a slight to his dignity (Latin: *dignitas*).2

#### **Civic dignity**

Civic dignity, like meritocratic dignity, was not a formal theory, but a set of historic practices that was regularized as custom and law at certain times and places in history. Meritocratic dignity, as we have seen, is predicated on intensely personalized relationships. Human dignity, as an inherent attribute of the individual, rests neither on personal nor on political relationships among people. Civic dignity stands in between these poles: it is predicated on a shared status of political equality among a body of citizens – a defined set of people who are jointly committed to the preservation of a public domain (Greek: *politeia*; Latin: *res publica*), but who are not social peers and who may have no personal ties with one another. Civic dignity is available to and protected by free citizens who have an equal opportunity to participate in a public domain of decision and action. Because civic dignity is grounded in *political* and not in personal relations, it cannot be reduced, conceptually, to meritocratic or to universal human dignity.

<sup>2</sup> Achilles, *Iliad*, Book 1; Caesar, Suetonius, *Divus Julius*, 33.

The ambit of civic dignity appears very broad when compared to highly exclusive meritocratic dignity, yet very parsimonious when compared to universal human dignity. Historically, civic dignity generalizes and stabilizes the high standing associated with archaic meritocratic dignity among an extensive body of citizens. Citizen dignity is robust insofar as it is sustained by rational self-interest, well-known and well-respected rules, and by the habitual behaviour developed as a result of living according to those rules. Dignity is transformed in the civic realm, from a scarce resource distributed by competitive zero-sum games, to a common pool resource sustained by a coordination game. By building common knowledge among citizens, and providing incentives for individuals to act in the public good, the common pool resource of dignity resists devolution into a commons tragedy.

In common with other forms of dignity, an individual's civic dignity is sustained by having the recognition and respect of others. Civic dignity differs from meritocratic dignity in that its defence is the collective responsibility of a clearly defined set of people, the citizens, who do not share personal ties. Recognition that their lives do indeed go better under a regime of civic dignity, on the part of the majority of citizens who would be denied high standing under a meritocratic regime, provides a rational motive for defence of the civic regime. Mobilization is facilitated by rules specifying sanctions and remedies: the institutions established by the community must provide both well-understood mechanisms and adequate incentives for specific individuals (public officials or otherwise) to come to the defence of those suffering dignitary harms. When the rules are properly structured, any member, or group of members, of a civic community suffering indignity can expect aid from their fellow citizens – most obviously in the guise of their peers sitting as a jury in a court of law, but potentially in the form of direct and collective action by the citizenry.

#### **Virtues of civic dignity**

Calling to account individuals, groups or corporate entities that seek to humiliate others requires a certain level of courage, and thus the defence of civic dignity requires the virtue of courage (cf. Balot 2004). Yet civic dignity does not place an extraordinary burden of courage on citizens: no one need be supercourageous so long as other citizens can and will coordinate their actions, by establishing and supporting rules that enable a ready response to dignitary threats. As a citizen of a community with well-structured rules, I can reasonably expect members of my community to act (and to have acted, pre-emptively, by establishing the right institutions) in defence of my dignity. I can expect that because they recognize that to do so is ultimately in their own interest, as well as in mine. It is in their interest as persons who may in turn be threatened by the arrogance of the strong, as persons concerned with the defence of their own dignity, and as persons who recognize that defence of dignity requires the aid of fellow citizens. Civic dignity is thus at once virtuous, reciprocal and rational.

In civic dignity, the responsibility of a group of civic peers to maintain the dignity of each and all is specified in law and in political culture. The law serves as a focal point enabling the actions of officials and citizens to be effectively coordinated (Weingast 1997). Because the mutuality of responsibility for responding to dignitary threats is common knowledge, when I choose to act in another's defence I can assume that my choice accords with the preferences and interests of my fellow citizens, and my actions will be coordinated with theirs. By coming to another's defence I am not, therefore, naively subjecting myself to a 'sucker's payoff'. And so, once again, our collective dignity, as a citizen body, is guaranteed by the rational commitment of each individual to the system that guarantees his and her own welfare.

Sustaining a regime of respect and recognition among an extensive population of diverse individuals entails a second virtue: self-restraint (Greek: *sˆophrosunˆe*). As citizens, we ought voluntarily to restrain ourselves from selfaggrandizing actions that compromise another's dignity. Yet once again, rationality limits the demands placed on individual virtue. As citizens, we rationally restrain ourselves from arrogant behaviour for three overlapping reasons. First, because we know the rules and expect that we will be sanctioned for infractions. Next, because we have come to believe that it is in our real, long-term interest to deny ourselves short-term gratification at the expense of the dignity of others. And, third, having internalized dignity as a value, acting arrogantly is no longer a source of pleasure.3

#### **Defending dignity by coordinated citizen action**

The key to sustaining a regime of civic dignity is a joint commitment to, and an agreement on the definition of, right action in respect to dignity and threats to it. That commitment and agreement are strengthened by seeing dignity as a matter of coordination rather than (as in the meritocratic regime) competition: mutual recognition of our common interest in sustaining the system of dignity leads us to assume mutual responsibility for doing so. Each of us acknowledges that we have some duties to one another and to the community, and we each grasp that doing our duty is also a rational choice. If each of us does the right thing, acts rationally, and thus fulfils those duties, then our own dignity is sustained in common. If we coordinate our behaviour by using legal rules as focal points for aligning choices and actions, then no one is left unprotected – no matter how individually weak he or she may be.

The system is reinforced by reputation effects when the citizen body joins in blaming and sanctioning those who fail to do their part in sustaining the regime

<sup>3</sup> Self-restraint/moderation (*sˆophosunˆe*) is a virtue that was manifest, in democratic Athenian evaluative vocabulary, by the middling/moderate/dignified (*metrios*) citizen. I am drawing here on Aristotle's (*Nicomachean Ethics*) theory of moral training by habituation and practice (*askˆesis*).

of dignity, while praising and rewarding those whose service in its defence is outstanding. Civic dignity retains space for recognizing and for according special respect and honour for extraordinary merit. Civic dignity need not be opposed to the desire to excel or the expectation that one will be appropriately recognized for achievement. An appropriately restrained version of competitive meritocracy may flourish within a regime of civic dignity, so long as the drive to excellence remains oriented towards pro-social ends. Likewise, the concern for defence of dignity among a body of citizens need not dull the concern felt by citizens for the dignity of those outside the citizen body. Although a complacent localism may emerge within a body of citizens, by the same token a sensitivity to the dangers posed by threats to civic dignity may sharpen the recognition of the value of human dignity.

#### **Dignity and democracy in classical Athens**

The practice of civic dignity developed in classical Athens in close association with democracy. In the immediate aftermath of the Athenian Revolution of 508 BC, all males then resident in Athenian territory became citizens – that is, full members of the community with substantial immunities and participation rights. In effect, the male community collectively took for itself, jointly and severally, the high standing once reserved for a few members of an elite of birth and wealth. Civic dignity was promoted and defended by an expansive (in historical terms) conception of citizenship. Athenian concern for civic dignity was manifest in new democratic rules and political culture. Moreover, because in Athens there was no property qualification for active citizenship, some citizens were richer and better educated – and thus had greater access to social power – than others. In light of the survival of meritocratic ideals among the elite, there always remained the danger that the stronger members of the citizen body would seek to humiliate or infantilize their weaker fellows. If it were to be sustained, civic dignity thus had to be actively defended by laws backed up by habits of behaviour. The development of democratic Athenian law and public discourse can be understood, at least in part, as a successful move on the part of the ordinary citizens of Athens to build an institutional and political-cultural system that effectively protected the dignity of all citizens.4

Democracy did not drive out meritocratic dignity, but it changed the way in which honour was gained and how claims to merit special consideration could legitimately be expressed in public. With the consolidation of Athenian democracy, traditional meritocratic values (for example, *eugeneia*: high birth-status; *kalokagathia*: inherent excellence manifest in physical beauty; *andreia*: manly courage) were appropriated by democratic discourse (in assembly and law

<sup>4</sup> Athenian revolution: Ober 2007 (with literature review); Democratic institutions: Ober 2008; political culture: Ober 1989.

courts) and generalized as values appropriately possessed by all citizens. Democratic rules and ideology emphasized the conjoined values of liberty (*eleutheria*) of the citizen and equality among citizens (key terms were *isonomia*: equality before the law; *isopsˆephia*: equality of vote; *isˆegoria*: equality in respect to public speech). The laws of the democracy (notably the law against *hubris*, considered below) criminalized the expression of social superiority (humiliation by word and deed) that was a behavioural foundation of archaic meritocratic society. Wealthy Athenians were now expected to exercise self-restraint in speech and action. If they sought special recognition, they were expected to demonstrate their meritorious love of honour (*philotimia*) by providing resources to the community in excess of their legal obligations. The community in turn expressed its appreciation with public expressions of approval: most notably, inscriptions recording public decrees recognizing the generosity and public-spiritedness of elite public benefactors.5

A speech of prosecution, written by the orator-politician Demosthenes for a criminal trial in 346 BC, provides a window into the mature democratic understanding of civic dignity and the role of the law and political culture in sustaining it. The defendant, a prominent Athenian politician named Meidias, was accused of violating the norms of dignity – Demosthenes repeatedly describes Meidias' public behaviour as *hubris*: wilful and harmful infliction of humiliation upon another. At the conclusion to his speech, Demosthenes reminded the citizen-jurors of the security (*bebaiotˆes*) in which each Athenian 'goes on his way':

Consider: in a moment, when the court rises, each of you will go away home, not wondering whether it will be someone friendly or someone unfriendly who will meet you on the way, or if he will be big or small, or if he will be strong or weak, or anything of that sort. Why so? Because in his heart [each citizen] knows, and is sure, and has put his trust in the constitution, that no one will take hold of him, or be insolent to him, or hit him. (Demosthenes 1990: 21.221) 6

Demosthenes' point is that the individual citizen can walk down the streets of Athens with his head up because he trusts in the formal rules governing the behaviour of others. He can go about his public and private business without worrying about threats to his dignity – without fear of humiliation. And this was, according to Demosthenes, because of Athens' democratic constitution. Yet law was not enough, in and of itself. Rules and the habit of acting in support of them must be mutually reinforcing. In his peroration, Demosthenes offers a theory of how legal institutions enable the mobilization of citizens in collective action

<sup>5</sup> Appropriation of meritocratic values and terms: Ober 1989; Whitehead 1993; law against *hubris*: Fisher 1992; *philotimia* in the democratic state: Whitehead 1983; public benefactors: Domingo Gygax (forthcoming).

<sup>6</sup> References to Demosthenes provide speech number and specify the section.

to support the public domain; this description neatly captures the mechanism underlying the defence of civic dignity.

For in fact, if you cared to consider and investigate the question of what it is that gives power and control over everything in the polis to those of you who are jurors at any given time . . . you would find that the reason is not that you alone of the citizens are armed and mobilized in ranks, nor that you are physically the best and strongest, nor that you are youngest in age, nor anything of the sort, but rather you'd find that you are powerful through the laws. And what is the power of the laws? Is it that, if any of you is attacked and gives a shout, they'll come running to your aid? No, they are just inscribed letters and have no ability to do that. What then is their motive power? You are, if you secure them and make them authoritative whenever anyone asks for aid. So the laws are powerful through you and you through the laws. You must therefore stand up for them in just the same way as any individual would stand up for himself if attacked; you must take the view that offenses against the law are common concerns. (Demosthenes 1990: 21.223–5)

Demosthenes' description of a world in which relatively poor and weak citizens went about their daily business with their heads held high, unafraid of dignitary threats, contrasts sharply with the conditions of pre-democratic Athens. The archaic Athenian poet-lawgiver Solon described evil conditions (which he sought to correct by his laws) in which wealthy and powerful Athenians enslaved their poorer and weaker fellows, and weak Athenians, for their part, 'trembled at the whims of their masters' (quoted in [Aristotle] *Constitution of Athens* 12.4). Solon's sharply framed poetic image conjoins humiliation (trembling) with infantilization (subjection to the master's whim). By seeking an end to those conditions of systematic humiliation and infantilization, Solon's law code set Athens on the road to civic dignity. Three generations later, in 508 BC, the ordinary people of Athens rose up in arms, defying elite leaders and risking vengeance by the powerful Spartans, to establish a regime of greater collective dignity. They rose up against the threat of return to conditions in which free men would tremble at the whims of masters and in anticipation of a community in which the dignity of citizens would be secure.

The result was a new democratic political order that, over the next 180 years, systematically promoted mutual respect and recognition among citizens, while enhancing opportunities for public participation and private risk-taking across the citizen population. The democracy enforced laws criminalizing wilful disrespect (*hubris*). It promoted mutual recognition by bringing together citizens from different walks of life in new institutions (artificial tribes, an agendasetting council, people's courts). By instituting new forms of social insurance (for example, support for orphans and the disabled), the democracy enabled citizens to take more calculated risks, individually and collectively.

One indication that Athens' democratic regime effectively defended civic dignity is the absence of evidence for personal patronage at Athens. Other well-documented societies of classical antiquity, including citizen-centred yet non-democratic societies such as Sparta and Rome, were grounded in personal patronage. In both Sparta and Rome, the dignity associated with citizenship remained limited; Sparta and Rome remained essentially meritocratic. By contrast, historians have searched in vain for evidence of patron–client relationships in democratic Athens, where a strong form of civic dignity was the norm.7

#### **Dignity of non-citizens**

The Athenian regime of democratic law and culture was focused, in the first instance, on civic dignity for citizens and defended by citizens. Yet dignity was, at least in principle, defended well *beyond* the ranks of citizens. In the same speech (Demosthenes 1990: 21.48–50) in which he reminded jurors of the meaning of their secure possession of civic dignity, Demosthenes noted that Athenian law protected '*any person*, either child or woman or man, free or slave', against intentional disrespect (*hubris*) and other unlawful (*paranomon*) treatment. Demosthenes notes that the Athenians 'do not think it right to treat with disrespect even the slaves whom they acquire by paying a price for them, but have publicly made this law to prevent it'.8

The law to which Demosthenes refers presumably dates back at least to the fifth century BC, since 'the Old Oligarch' – an anonymous anti-democratic writer of the later fifth century – points out to his intended elite readers that in Athens 'you' are not permitted (*oute*... *exestin*) to hit slaves and foreigners at will. Nor, he adds, will an Athenian slave stand aside for you in the road. The Old Oligarch explains the Athenians' motive for this law against hitting at will as concern for providing a sort of public risk insurance. He points out that lower-class Athenian citizens could not be readily distinguished, by dress or appearance, from slaves and resident foreigners. Hence, he says, if powerful men were allowed to please themselves by striking slaves or foreigners at will, they might mistakenly strike an Athenian citizen (1.10). And so, claims the Old Oligarch, it was in order to ensure their own security that the Athenian citizenry forbade mistreatment of slaves and foreigners.

We cannot hope to recover the actual motives and intentions of the legislator who wrote the Athenian law against *hubris* to include non-citizens, or of the Athenian citizens who affirmed it. Regardless of the Athenians' actual legislative intent, their extension of some legal protection to non-citizens points to

<sup>7</sup> Patronage in classical antiquity: Wallace-Hadrill 1989; no patronage at Athens: Millett 1989.

<sup>8</sup> In contrast to Kant, Demosthenes imagines that putting a price on humans and dignity (as non-humiliation) are compatible. Demosthenes' comment underlines both the recognition of something like human dignity (even slaves ought not to be unnecessarily humiliated) but also the limited range of actions that recognition motivated.

how the recognition of dignity as a general attribute of humans might arise from active defence of civic dignity as a common pool resource. The Greeks and Romans never developed the conception of intrinsic human dignity as the foundational premise of human rights, either in morality or in law. There is no ancient equivalent of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, or of Article 1 of the German Constitution. Yet the idea that each human being naturally possesses an inherent dignity was developed and widely disseminated by the ancient Stoics. Stoicism began with Zeno of Citium, who lived as a resident foreigner in Athens beginning in about 300 BC This was an era in which perhaps half of the Greek city-states had democratic governments. If we had more than mere fragments of Zeno's *Republic*, we might be able to say more about how the historical experience of civic dignity affected the earliest philosophical development of the concept of inherent human dignity.

#### **References**

- Balot, R. K. 2004. 'Courage in the Democratic Polis', *Classical Quarterly* 54: 406–23 Berlin, I. 1969. *Four Essays on Liberty*. Oxford University Press
- Demosthenes. 1990. *Demosthenes, Against Meidias: Oration 21*, ed. and trans. D. M. MacDowell. Oxford, New York: Clarendon Press
- Domingo Gygax, M. Forthcoming. *Benefaction and Rewards in the Ancient Greek City: The Origins of Euergetism*. Cambridge University Press
- Fisher, N. R. E. 1992. *Hybris: A Study in the Values of Honour and Shame in Ancient Greece*. Warminster: Aris & Phillips
- Martin, R. P. 1989. *The Language of Heroes: Speech and Performance in the Iliad*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press
- Millett, P. C.1989. 'Patronage and Its Avoidance in Classical Athens', in A. Wallace-Hadrill (ed.), *Patronage in Ancient Society*. London: Routledge, 15–48
- Nagy, G. 1979. *The Best of the Achaeans: Concepts of the Hero in Archaic Greek poetry*. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press
- Ober, J. 1989. *Mass and Elite in Democratic Athens: Rhetoric, Ideology, and the Power of the People*. Princeton University Press
	- 2007. '"I Besieged That Man": Democracy's Revolutionary Start', in K. Raaflaub, J. Ober and R. W. Wallace (eds.), *The Origins of Democracy in Ancient Greece*. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 83–104
	- 2008. *Democracy and Knowledge: Innovation and Learning in Classical Athens*. Princeton University Press
- 2012. 'Democracy's Dignity', *American Political Science Review* 106(4): 827–46
- Pettit, P. 1997. *Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government*. Oxford, New York: Clarendon Press
- Skinner, Q. 1998. *Liberty Before Liberalism*. Cambridge University Press
- Waldron, J. 2012. *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*. Oxford University Press
- Wallace-Hadrill, A. (ed.). 1989. *Patronage in Ancient Society*. London: Routledge
- Weingast, B. R. 1997. 'The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law', *American Political Science Review* 91: 245–63
- Whitehead, D. 1983. 'Competitive Outlay and Community Profit: Philotimia in Democratic Athens', *Classica et Mediaevalia* 34: 55–74
	- 1993. 'Cardinal Virtues: The Language of Public Approbation in Democratic Athens', *Classica et Mediaevalia* 44: 37–75