

---

### Human dignity in late-medieval spiritual and political conflicts

DIETMAR MIETH∗

#### **Human dignity in the late Middle Ages: mysticism and the law of nations**

Recently, medievalists have started to address the question of individuality in the Middle Ages. They broadly agree that Leopold von Ranke, Jakob Burkhardt and others were misguided in understanding the Renaissance as a break with the dark medieval collectivism.1 The same holds – to an extent that is yet to be determined – for the understanding and justification of human dignity. In the Middle Ages, a number of perspectives arise that break ground for the idea of dignity and equality between humans. At the same time, though, there are numerous medieval approaches that vigorously challenge such ideas.

The Church Fathers connected the ancient idea that human beings have a special place in the world because of their rational capacities and their ability for self-formation (the Stoics, Cicero), with the Christian doctrine of the human being as created in the image of God (*imago Dei*) or the redeemed (baptized) human as similar to God (*similitudo*). That is, by participating in God in being His image, human beings at the same time participate in God's reason. Humans have the capacity to reflect on themselves, and to exercise free will (*liberum arbitrium*). The particular theory of human dignity as springing from freedom – especially the individual's freedom of the will and his capacity for self-determination and self-knowledge – does not (as is often assumed) originate from Pico della Mirandola's work, *De hominis dignitate*, but can already be found in Alcuin of York's *De dignitate conditionis humanae*(cf. Marenbon 1981), as well as in several twelfth-century texts. Peter Abelard develops an account of the will as a reflexive structure and the unity of human beings as rational creatures. The 'I' in this theory – the conscious and reflexive relation of people to their own will – is determined by rationality, which humans employ to evaluate possible actions and to decide to act in a particular way. Yet such a *secundum*

<sup>∗</sup> Translated by Naomi van Steenbergen in collaboration with the author.

<sup>1</sup> Cf. Aertsen and Speer 1996, particularly the introduction by Jan A. Aertsen, Ibid.: ix ff. In the same vein, Richard Tuck (1979) and Brian Tierney (1997; 2008) demonstrate that the idea of (individual) human rights is based in medieval scholastic thought.

*rationem agere* was already identified by Pseudo-Dionysus as the ethical capacity of the human being; one that is not only a form of freedom, but also a responsibility.2

Yet from the Christian perspective, humans are confronted with contingency, sin and the need for salvation. This raises the question whether dignity can be lost or revoked. Must dignity first be re-established by baptism? In other words, is dignity possible at all outside of the Church as an institution of salvation, which through its sacraments brings salvation by Christ within reach? In the medieval literature, the notion of a *dignitas*that applies universally to all persons has a theological basis. It corresponds to the assumption that human beings were created for their own sake, and that therefore they have inherent worth. Besides the place of humans in the world, what forms the basis for human dignity in the Middle Ages is their rational, deliberate self-determination. In the late-twelfth-century work, *De miseria humanae conditionis*, Lotario dei Conti di Segni, later Pope Innocent III, contrasts the *dignitas humanae naturae* with the *vilitas humanae conditionis*. On the basis of their divine nature, human beings can be considered to have worth in themselves, yet their actual condition is wretched (cf. Innocent III; Sturlese 2007: 35–45). In the thirteenth century, two concepts stood in opposition: the emphasis on the dignity of creation, which could never be lost, and the dignity of salvation that humans could lose through sin. Insofar as in this context the emphasis was put on original sin, which could be redeemed by baptism, the unbaptized did not partake in the dignity of salvation. This could be understood to mean either that these persons were not given the dignity of creation either, or that they were deprived of it.

The following selection of late-medieval tendencies proceeds, as it were, from the inside outwards. Essential to late-medieval mysticism is the *homo divinus*, who at the same time, figuratively, is the *homo nobilis* (the noble human). The doctrine of *homo divinus* dominates mysticism as well as the movement of the Free Spirit from the end of the thirteenth and throughout the fourteenth century. The similarity between the doctrines of *homo divinus* and *homo nobilis* in so-called German mysticism consists in the fact that 'humanity', against a theological–philosophical backdrop, is drawn upon in order to legitimize a special kind of dignity and special rights. In this way, reflection on what is human is deeply embedded in the Middle Ages, well before Humanism. Around the same time, the canonistic schools of Bologna and Padua develop the *ius gentium*, the law of nations, in a way that, while referring to the doctrines of *homo divinus* and *homo nobilis*, is distinct from it. The *ius gentium* too can serve to show how the right of the unbaptized (persons as well as nations) could advance under new political constellations in the first three decades of the fifteenth century – even in the political environment of the Council of Constance.

<sup>2</sup> This formula frequently occurs in Thomas Aquinas; see for instance Q *Quaestiones disputatae de veritate*. 16,1,9; STh 1–2, 18,5.

#### **Homo divinus et nobilis: the motive of human dignity in Meister Eckhart**

Late-medieval mysticism prepares the way of self-withdrawal and the nobility of the soul that leads towards the universal equality of human beings especially through Meister Eckhart and Marguerite Porete. Alongside the hierarchies of the Church and the state, the internal hierarchy of the soul appeared. The motif of inwardness as relational motif – for Eckhart in the shape of an intellectual relation, for Marguerite Porete as a relation of the will – expands in the social domain to the equality of all human beings. For the nobility of the soul has to do with humanity, no more and no less. For Meister Eckhart (*c*.1260–1328), Christ's act of redemption is not present in its original form; often, it is eclipsed by God's general devotion to men in the event of incarnation. At the centre is always 'humanity'.

As Kurt Flasch emphasizes, what is at stake is a theory of recognition. God is self-evidently given, but can his recognition be accounted for? (Flasch 2010: 52–5, 268f) God's divine–human nature must be recognizable in humanity as reason and free will, that is to say, in ethics. Whatever human criteria humans can acutely perceive and recognize can be used as criteria for our image of God: if God did not mean righteousness, then he would not mean anything to the righteous person. This means that the ethical recognition of righteousness becomes relevant as a theological criterion too. Theology is not separated from rationality; indeed, it is entrusted to it all the more clearly, since faith is to be explained through the 'natural grounds of rationality'. This is why Eckhart's commentary on John describes ethics more precisely as the relation between faith and reason:

In the beginning was the word. With respect to morality, we teach that the principle of all our intentions and actions must be God . . . Yet we also teach that our work ought to be rational, and that it ought to be a work that is controlled by the direction and order of reason. For 'In the beginning was the word' also means: in the beginning was reason . . . What is done in accordance with reason . . . emanates from God's countenance. (Psalm 16:2, John, Meister Eckhart 1936: vol. III, n. 51: 42)

Eckhart is revolutionary in his influence, even if he did not exactly intend to be so. He lays the groundwork for freedom in the self-abnegation of any human being. In his defence during his trial, he refers to his 'efforts for justice (or righteousness)' that earned him hostility and prosecution (cf. Meister Eckhart 1936: vol. V, n. 77: 275). Eckhart's revaluation of human beings from the inside out did not result in new institutions or external reforms, but his revaluation created a new self-awareness that was accessible to everyone, one that kept cropping up after him and that did not exclusively involve Christians. After Eckhart, this kind of self-awareness can be found in the theological schools of Cracow and Salamanca, respectively one and two centuries later.

The *homo divinus*, as Loris Sturlese characterizes the subject of 'the philosophical projects in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries', is aware of his divine constitution.3 This awareness does not deny the role of Church and politics asinstitutions, but views them as accompanying, not constitutive, instances. The subject's sense of self advances. For Eckhart, Christology becomes a reference point for the nobility of the soul. This also deeply relativizes the distinction between Christians, Jews and Muslims. This development was wholly in line with the openness to debate at the time.

We may conclude: the *homo divinus* of Eckhart and his spiritual contemporaries heightens the significance of the individual, yet does not carry this significance over into the domain of human rights. Certainly, the rise of the individual in mysticism is a source from which Humanism and the Reformation can draw. On the one hand, this stems from a philosophical intellectualism, which puts considerable emphasis on rationality; on the other hand, it stems from the right to personally assure oneself of one's faith.

#### **The ius gentium and the recognition of equal humanity in the context of the dispute between Poland and the Teutonic Order at the time of the Council of Constance**

In Eckhart's younger contemporary, Marsilius of Padua (1280–1342/3), a state philosopher had stood up who 'questioned the grounds and legitimacy of state authority' (Imbach 1989: 162). On the basis of the Roman-canonical principle according to which everything that pertains to all must be decided by all, he 'provided the beginnings of a theory of a sovereignty of the people' (*ibid*.: 162). Admittedly, what this doctrine refers to is a *universitas civium*, which leaves the question who can *be* a civilian unanswered, especially since whenever this issue occurs Marsilius falls back on Aristotle, for whom only the rights of full citizens are taken into account. And what is at stake here are not civil rights, but universal human rights, on which civil rights rest. This is what Marsilius seems to allude to when he writes that 'the design of political authority ought to be based on the consensus of all those affected' (*ibid*.: 163). Imbach shows that this 'truly fundamental idea in the Middle Ages was first formulated by Duns Scotus in connection with the debate on property'. For Marsilius, power over people and material goods is prescribed neither in laws of nature nor by divine command. This means that it rests on a consensus, 'on the voluntary agreement of free persons' (*ibid*.: 163, 164, n. 85). The sentence from Dante's *De monarchia* that Imbach cites (I, xii, 10) allows us to transfer to the considerations that will follow: 'Upright governments have liberty as their aim, that men may live for themselves' (Imbach 1989: 164). For what is at stake in what is to follow is the *propter se* (for themselves) of human beings as the source of political

<sup>3</sup> *Homo divinus* is the title of Sturlese's essay collection that came out in 2007. Relevant here are mostly pp. 34–45.

institutions. At the beginning of the fourteenth century, however, philosophers considered this question fundamentally in relation to the emancipation of all laity from the demands of the Church. The canonists on the other hand had fewer problems with papalism – for instance as an authority that embodied the law of peoples but was bound by natural law. Insofar as they did not only consider the established *civitates*, but also the coexistence of 'Christian' and 'pagan' nations, they did not argue on the basis of a consensus theory, but, as we shall see, with natural law, which at the same time curtailed the rights of the Pope as an institution for the law of nations.

The relation between the justification of wars, human dignity and human rights shows itself in the medieval example of a highly theorized legal-moral debate that took place at and around the Council of Constance (1414–18). In the present context, the arguments relating to natural law or the law of reason are from particular interest. These were used by the Cracow Academy4 to argue – in a debate with the legal scholars of the universities of Pisa, Padua and Bologna who were well-grounded in the theory of the state, and with the Dominican Falkenberg as the chief ideologist of the Teutonic Order – that it is not permitted to wage war on pagan nations, since they too are God's creatures. While such motives – that even pagans are God's 'handiwork' – can already be found in Wolfram von Eschenbach's *Willehalm* or in Raimundus Lullus (*c*.1300), wars against infidels were considered the work of God: God wills it (*Dieu lo vult*) had been the motto of the crusades since the eleventh century.

With respect to pre-modern engagement with human dignity, one might think of Pico della Mirandola, whose argument still lies entirely within the framework of creation and the idea of human beings as the *imago Dei*, or of the Schools of Salamanca, Vittoria and Las Casas. The latter are of particular significance since their ideas – propagated in the sixteenth-century debate at the Council of Valladolid against Sepulveda, who was an adherent of the Aristotelian ´ theory of slavery – were of great importance for the New World. A similar debate on the dignity and rights of heathens had taken place more than a hundred years earlier between Johannes von Falkenberg, the Dominican theologian of the Teutonic Order, and Paulus Wladimiri. On a canonist basis, following natural law, the latter contested (along with Stanislaus Skarbimierz, who was to become one of his successors as a rector) the right of the Pope to assign pagan territories to the Teutonic Order. He advocated requiring justification for all wars, regardless against which peoples, and he emphasized the right to coexistence of Christian and non-Christian nations. Wladimiri's arguments, which were grounded in the interpretation of canon law by the School of Padua, were not uncommon. They found favour with many at the Council of Constance.

<sup>4</sup> The Cracow Academy was formed by the theological and canonist faculties of the Polish University of Cracow (founded in 1364; the theological faculty in 1397) that were led by Paulus Wladimiri.

The secondary literature is ambivalent about the treaties and corresponding rights that were negotiated in the thirteenth century between several rulers and the Teutonic Order. The Teutonic Order had understood its powers and entitlement to territories extensively, and enslaved or oppressed the pagan Prussians without mustering a whole lot of interest for their peaceful conversion, which after all would have relativized the reason for the conquests. Instead, the Order installed itself majestically in the centre of Marienburg, and took charge of important trading towns such as Thorn and Danzig. The initial good relations with Poland gradually disintegrated in the course of the fourteenth century, and came to a definitive end when Ladislaus Jagiełło, a pagan Lithuanian monarch, converted to Christianity in order to become King of Poland. In 1410, the dispute led to a war, which, due to considerable propaganda from both parties, involved western European knights and mercenaries as well. In the first instance, the military dispute ended in the battle of Tannenberg (or, in Polish, Grunwald) where the Order suffered a dramatic loss against the Polish– Lithuanian coalition, resulting in the Peace of Thorn (1411). The conflict kept flaring up though, and was brought to the Council of Constance. An arbitral verdict by Emperor Sigismund in favour of the Order did not end the dispute. The conflict continued to preoccupy the curia of Pope Martin V, who was elected at Constance. The next step was to draw upon advisors from the universities of Pisa, Padua and Florence. Paulus Wladimiri, who had been educated at the Italian universities as well as at the University of Prague, was a prominent member of the Polish delegation, both in Constance with Emperor Sigismund and at the papal curia. Of interest for the current chapter is not the way the conflict evolved, but the arguments on human rights and the rights of nations (especially of pagan peoples) that were used in it. The arguments can be easily reconstructed from the documentation. In order to do so, I shall consider first the expert testimony from the legal experts from Padua, Florence and Pisa (cf. Wos 1971: 99–123), followed by Paulus Wladimiri's *magnum opus*, 5 and finally a text by Ladislaus Skarbimierz from the same early 'Cracow Academy' (Skarbimierza 1979).

The Padua advice was mostly concerned with the validity of the fourteenthcentury agreements between the Order and Kasimir III of Poland. The formal objection that the Order was not able to produce and provide the complete set of relevant documents was complemented by the argument that, even if the documents had been ratified by the king, he would not have been authorized to do so, since as a king he represented and was responsible for the people and the territory. His task, according to the objection, was to protect the rights of the people, whether heathen or Christian, as well as the integrity of his country. This was a standpoint that later came to be adopted by his successor, Jagiełło. In this line of argument, the position deriving from natural law and the law of

5 Cf. the most important works of Wladimir: *Saevientibus* (1415), *Opini ostiensis* (1415) and *Ad aperiendam* (1416), edited by Ehrlich (1969).

reason that presupposes all human beings to have rationality and freedom – that is to say, human dignity and human rights – is already taken as a given. In contrast, the protection of Christian faith, on which this advice does insist, is permitted only in the case of prosecution by pagans and only in order to secure pre-established rights. In this context, the Teutonic Order had not only referred to attacks of the Samaiten, which it considered itself justified in fending off (mostly through pre-emptive defence), but also to the deeds of the Tatars in the army of the Lithuanian leader Vytautas (Withold) in the 1410 war, who had pillaged and burnt down a town, driving citizens into a church and burning them alive. War crimes on the side of the Order have been reported as well. In Paulus Wladimiri's biography, they form a central reason for his concern with the rights of the heathens (cf. Wos 1971: 77).

From where does Wladimiri derive his theses? He mostly follows three leads. First, the *lex divina*, which he understands as the authoritative interpretation of the *lex naturalis* – that is to say, he introduces this law as a rational authority. The natural or rational law is embodied in the Ten Commandments as well as in the commandment to love one's neighbour as oneself. Historically, it is continued in the collected legal texts of the Church (the papal decretals), which transcend regional legal provisions and therefore, according to numerous commentaries, are the only normative standards that can be drawn upon with respect to legal matters that apply to entire peoples. The second lead – not explicitly declared as in the *lex divina* – is the *lex naturae*, a law that is comprehensible through rational knowledge by non-believers as well, and which, one might say, forms a 'reflexive equilibrium' of rational insights with the standards expressed by the Church. The third lead is a theoretical debate with Cardinal 'Ostiensis', Henricus de Segusio (*c*.1194–1271), a famous interpreter of the collection of decretals whose conception of right is adopted by representatives of the Teutonic Order, amongst whom Johannes von Falkenberg (cf. Senko ´ 1986; Ehrlich 1966– 9: 113–43). Against him, Wladimiri refers to the interpretation of the decretals by Innocent IV (*c*.1195–1254) as well as to Thomas Aquinas.

In his contribution to the mission of conversion, Innocent IV had appointed bishops in the regions around the Baltic Sea, and granted heathens the right to their own state. Ostiensis, in contrast, put a much stronger emphasis on the papal-political supremacy, and took the Pope, as an authority higher than the emperor and as an absolutely comprehensive institution, to be able to overrule regional authorities. According to Ostiensis, rights were primarily Christian rights, and concerned both the propagation and the defence of faith. This perspective curtailed the moral and legal restrictions of the *ius ad bellum* against heathens. Heathens did not possess originary rights. In light of the right of creation and the *ius naturale*, heathendom equalled self-deprivation of rights. For this reason, a heathen can be enslaved, and when converted he can be forced to work. Ostiensis interpreted Christ as *caput universalis* from a monistic perspective that made the Pope into a central authority, without regard for the self-reliance of creation. Interestingly, those who followed this interpretation were the Renaissance Popes such as Nicholas V (a humanist!) in reference to Portugal's African conquests, and Alexander VI with his infamous bull*Inter cetera*, which allowed the Spanish Crown to disenfranchise the Indians and their states. It is important to realize, though, that these theological texts were employed as convenient – they did not justify the exploitation, but were used to silence its opponents. Ultimately, power determined more than the legal position of those concerned.

In contrast to Ostiensis, the teachings of Paulus Wladimiri, close in content to the doctrine of Pope Innocent IV, can be summarized in the following ten points:

- (1) The original equality of all human beings is grounded in the fact that humans are the image of God; a fact that is established in creation and that applies to every human being. Even though the original sin casts a shadow on the dignity that is thus given, sin does not annul this dignity. Wladimiri is therefore opposed to a theory according to which one can be deprived of this dignity, which is supposed to be true for those who are unbaptized and remain in sin. It seems likely that such a theory underlies Ostiensis' interpretations.
- (2) In light of the message of Christianity, violence calls for particularly strong justification. The doctrine of a 'just' war should therefore be understood exactly as a doctrine of reasons or justification, even though war remains an evil that is to be avoided. The conditions *auctoritas legitima*, *iusta causa* (in the case of defence), *ultima ratio* and *iustis mediis* may not be annulled or modified on the grounds of lesser or derivative rights of the heathens.
- (3) Pagan states or areas under pagan control are not necessarily unjust communities that can be eradicated by Christian occupation. They are to be considered equal partners, and their territorial integrity ought to be respected.
- (4) No government monarch, emperor, pope may terminate or compromise the territorial integrity of its own state. This holds in particular for the agreements between Poland and the Teutonic Order. Property rights in the sense of sovereign rights cannot be granted in this manner.
- (5) The authority of the Pope, understood as the primary authority (for instance, *vis-`a-vis* emperors and kings; the priority of the spiritual over the worldly sword, such as in the case of Innocent IV) does not entail absolute rule-making authority (the Pope is not a world monarch, as the theological 'legalists' Ostiensis and Falkenberg envisage). This is a rejection of the idea that the Pope can take command of countries and intervene in their integrity without heeding their governmental autonomy. What remains are only subsidiary possibilities, that is – with respect to pagan territories – defence and the protection of Christian Believers against prosecution. If the violence of the Pope is thus restricted, this holds *a fortiori* for the Christian emperors, kings, etc.
- (6) A particular outgrowth of the delegitimization of pagan human rights is the manner of warfare of the Order, which animated the western knighthood to – almost as a kind of sport – join it in campaigns into pagan land in order to go looting or asserting themselves against poorly armed resistance. It is perfectly possible that Paulus Wladimiri, whose family and homeland were damaged by such looting campaigns, would have found such behaviour particularly abhorrent.
- (7) The service of faith is determined by the condition that conversion should not be attained violently. In the thirteenth century, dioceses in which both Christians and heathens lived had been established in Prussia for this very purpose. Instead of peaceful coexistence, the Order had caused unrest in these places. Indeed, doubts were raised as to whether the Order was at all interested in establishing states of Christians endowed with rights.
- (8) Important was the question whether it was permissible to wage war in the name of rights (human rights and territorial rights) in military alliances with heathens and heretics (which referred to orthodox Christians!). As mentioned above, in the battle of Tannenberg, Tatars (also Muslims) and orthodox Christians from Lithuania had fought on the side of Poland. (The Christian outrage also related to war atrocities. Therefore, the question was: what was positively permissible, and what should be put up with? At the same time, this was a question of *iustis mediis*. From the perspective of natural law, the participation of heathens in a just battle was less of a problem than putting up with war atrocities, which one should obviously not want as such. In my opinion, Skarbimierz' reasoning in particular is rather one-sided.)
- (9) Until the nineteenth century, the Council of Constance was the largest convention of the Church and of those nations who self-identified as western-Christian. In addition, Conciliarism sparked the hope of international understanding, and constituted a comprehensive institution for transnational cooperation. For this reason, the Cracovians are close to the Conciliarists, even if they do not wish to take up an anti-hierocratic standpoint explicitly.
- (10) The possibility of international settlement of conflicts is theoretically grounded in the priority of non-violence, and in the idea of the recognition of sovereignties regardless of their relation to Christian faith. The ethical attitude that is demanded by faith and confirmed by natural law in this case takes priority over the Christian-monistic attitude that drove the legalists to grant rights only to those baptized, indeed to deny neophytes the same rights as Christian conquerors. Nicholas V's bull *Romanus Pontifex* (1455), in contrast, granted the Portuguese conquerors in Africa the right to take possession of all goods, and to subject the original inhabitants to 'everlasting slavery'. It is evident that the will to spread Christianity was just a feeble guise.

In strong contrast to Wladimiri's arguments, the bulls of later Popes such as Nicholas V and Alexander VI allowed slavery, without even referring to the School of Padua or its continuation in the Cracow Academy.6 They were an enormous step backwards. History developed differently in Prussia than in Latin America. The implementation of these earlier progressive ideas in the *leyes nuevas* of King Charles V could not be sustained in the Latin American colonies. The movement of recognition of equality in the sense of the law of nations was more successful in eastern Europe, since it could be connected with power-political motives; something that failed in Latin America. In the late Middle Ages, the political circumstances worked in favour of human rights and of sovereignty rights independent of faith.

#### **References**

- Aegidius Romanus. 1929. *De ecclesiastica potestate*, ed. R. Scholz, Weimar; Hermann Boehlau Nachfolger (English edition: Aegius Romanus. *De ecclesiastica potestate*, ed. R. W. Dyson. New York: Columbia University Press, 2004)
- Aertsen, J. A., and Speer, A. (eds.). 1996. *Individuum und Individualit¨at im Mittelalter*. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter
- Alexandrowicz, Ch. H. 1963. 'Paulus Vladimiri and the Development of the Doctrine of Coexistence of Christian and Non-Christian Countries', *British Yearbook of International Law* 39: 441–8
- Belch, S. F. (ed.). 1965. *Paulus Vladimiri and His Doctrine Concerning International Law and Politics*, vols. 1–2. The Hague, Paris: Mouton and Co.
- Bockenf ¨ orde, E. W. ¨ 2006. *Geschichte der Rechts- und Staatsphilosophie: Antike und Mittelalter*, 2nd edn, Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck – Uni-Taschenbuch ¨
- Ehrlich, L. 1966–9. *Works of Paul Wladimiri, a Selection (Latin, English)*, vols. I–III. Warsaw: Instytut Wydawnicy PAX
- Flasch, K. 2010. *Meister Eckhart: Philosoph des Christentums*. Munich: C. H. Beck
- Grewe, W. G. (ed.). 1988–95. *Fontes historiae jus gentium*.3 vols. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter
- Grewe, W. G., and Evers, M. 2000. *The Epoches of International Law*. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter
- Imbach, R. 1989. *Laien in der Philosophie des Mittelalters Hinweise und Anregungen zu einem vernachl¨assigten Thema*. Bochum: B. R. Gruner ¨
- Marenbon, J. 1981. *From the Circle of Alcuin to the School of Auxerre: Logic, Theology and Philosophy in the Early Middle Ages*. Cambridge University Press
- Meister Eckhart. 1936. *Die Lateinischen Werke*, vols. 1–5, ed. Loris Sturlese, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer
- Senko, W. ´ 1973. 'Les tendances prehumnaistes dans la philosophie polonaise au XVe ´ siecle', in Academia Polaca della Scienza, Biblioteca e Centro di Studi di Roma, ` fasc.62, Wroclaw *et al*.
- 6 The papal documents (Bulls) that were important for the question concerning the Indians are: Nicholas V, *Romanus pontifex* (to King Alphons V of Portugal); Alexander VI, *Inter cetera* of 1493 (to Isabella and Ferdinand of Spain), and Paul III, *Sublimus Dei* of 9 June 1537; the latter can be understood as an 'abrogation' of the earlier ones.
- 1986. *Johannis Falkenberga 'De Monarchia Mundi'*(Texts and Studia, Histora Theologica in Polonia Ex Cultu Spectantia, vol. XX). Warsaw: Academia Teologii Katholikiej
- Skarbimierza, Stanislaw Ze. 1979. *Sermones Sapientiales*, ed. B. Chmielowska, Textus et Studia, vol. IV, fasc. 1. Warsaw: Academia Teologii Katholikiej
- Sturlese, L. 2007. *Homo divinus: philosophische Projekte in Deutschland zwischen Meister Eckhart und Heinrich Seuse*. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer
- Tierney, B. 1997. *The Idea of Natural Rights: Studies on Natural Rights, Natural Law and Church Law 1150–1625*. Atlanta, GA: Scholar Press
	- 2008. *Religions, Law and the Growth of Constitutional Thought 1150–1650*. Cambridge University Press
- Thomas Aquinas. 1953. *Quaestiones disputatae de veritate Truth, Questions 10–20*, trans. J. V. McGlynn SJ. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, http://dhspriory.org/thomas/ QDdeVer.htm
- Thomas Aquinas, 'New English Translation of St Thomas Aquinas's Summa Theologiae', trans. A. J. Freddoso, University of Notre Dame. Parts 1 and 2, www3.nd.edu/ ~afreddos/summa-translation/TOC-part1-2.htm
- Tuck, R. 1979. *Natural Rights Theories: Their Origin and Development*. Cambridge University Press
- Wos, Jan Wladislaw. 1971. 'Appunti per la biografia di Paulus Wladimiri Canonista Polacco del seculo XV', in *Studi Senesi*, vol. LXXXIII, 57–124, Appendix II, 'A Latin Edition of the Expert Opinion of Canonists from Padova, Fiorentina and Siena to the Juridical Questions Between the Teutonic Order and Poland'