

---

### The Council of Valladolid (1550–1551): a European disputation about the human dignity of indigenous peoples of the Americas

LARS KIRKHUSMO PHARO

### **Historical background to the Council of Valladolid**

From the late-fifteenth century, the 'discovery' of continents and different cultures had a profound philosophical and theological impact upon the European conception of non-European and non-Christian peoples. Spain's war, conquest and ensuing colonization of the continent later denominated as 'America' from the beginning of the sixteenth century constitutes the political, economic and religious background to a principle moral debate on the human dignity and rights of non-European and non-Christian people. About fifty years after the 'discovery' of 'America', a disputation was organized by King Charles I of Spain (1500–58) 1 at the Colegio de San Gregorio in the Spanish city of Valladolid during the period of 1550 to 1551. He assembled a *junta* (council) of fourteen distinguished theologians who were specialists in Catholic canon law – the Consejo Real de las Indias (also known as the 'Council of the Fourteen') – with the purpose of issuing a ruling whether the methods of war and conquest of America were just. Another important subject was the manner in which the indigenous American peoples were to be converted to Catholicism as had been demanded by various papal bulls. The current situation in colonial 'Spanish America' was enforced conversion to Christianity, compulsory labour, tribute and violent treatment of indigenous people within the *encomienda* system. King Charles I suspended the war and conquest in Spanish America until these concerns were to be resolved at the Council of Valladolid (Hanke 1959; Losada 1971; Williams 1990; Veiteberg 1994).

### **Disputation about the nature and rationality of indigenous peoples**

What Lewis Hanke denominates as 'the Intellectual and Religious Capacity' (Hanke 1974) of American indigenous peoples, represented the central matter for the disputation at the Council of Valladolid. The nature and rationality, and

1 As the Holy Roman emperor (1519–56) he is designated as Charles V.

thus accordingly the humanity, of '*Los Indios*' were questioned through a formal inquiry. The concept of humanity is intimately related to the concepts of dignity and rights. A person who is not understood to possess rationality is not acknowledged to be human, and consequently has no dignity and no rights. The controversy was fundamentally a philosophical and moral debate on the supposed inferiority of non-European or non-Christian cultures as compared to the Christian so-called 'civilized' European nations. The humanity of the indigenous peoples of America was discussed on the background of Catholicism and European philosophy based upon previous and contemporary thinking and schools in law, philosophy and theology (Williams 1990). The disputation at Valladolid not only represents two philosophical models within the history of European ideas since antiquity, but also generates a considerable aftermath in the colonial and post-colonial period (Hanke 1959; Hanke 1974; Pagden 1982): 'Sepulveda and Las Casas still represent two basic and contradictory responses ´ to the question posed by the existence of people in the world who are different from ourselves' (Hanke 1959: 95).

The debate on the nature or rationality of American indigenous peoples took place between two members of the Dominican Order: Juan Gines de Sep ´ ulveda ´ (1489–1573) and Bartolome de Las Casas ( ´ 1484–1566). Sepulveda was a philoso- ´ pher, lawyer and theologian. Written in Latin, the dialogue *Democrates Alter* or *Democrates Secundus sive de justis causis belli apud Indos* (1544?) ('A Second Democritus: on the Just Causes of the War with the Indians') contain his arguments of the later disputation at Valladolid (Sepulveda ´ 1951). As friar and Bishop of Chiapas of southern Mexico, Las Casas was not an academic but interested in the practice of law and politics towards indigenous peoples. Las Casas' Latin *Apolog´etica Historia* (1547) argues against *Democrates Secundus*, whereas his later treatise, 'Aqu´ı se contiene una disputa' in *Tratados* (Las Casas 1966) outlines the debate at Valladolid. The same book contains *Argumentum Apologiae*, which also contests Sepulveda's theories from ´ *Democrates Alter* (Hanke 1959; Hanke 1974; Losada 1971; Veiteberg 1994).

Associated with the subject of the nature and rationality at the disputation of Valladolid was the Aristotelian concept of 'natural slavery' and the justification of war against the indigenous peoples of America. In defending the war, Sepulveda forwarded four arguments followed by the reply of Las Casas (Losada ´ 1971: 282–306). Just war can be waged against peoples whom Sepulveda classifies ´ as 'barbarians' or inferior *homunculi*. According to Sepulveda, the indigenous ´ people were 'savages' observing non-Christian practices against nature. He compares indigenous American and European institutions, science, cultures, customs, laws and religions, in all of which the Europeans were deemed superior. Sepulveda maintains that since the indigenous peoples have no culture ´ and are not rational human beings, there is a natural condition making them suitable for slavery. He refers to Aristotle's theory of 'natural slavery' (*servitutem naturae*) as defined in Book I of *Politics* (Aristotle 1998). Sepulveda contends ´ that people with no reason or rational faculties practising barbaric customs are disposed to slavery. Moreover, he claims that 'idolatry' is a sin against nature, which justifies war. Since they are not rational human beings, indigenous peoples can only be converted by violence and conquest. By contrast, Las Casas argues that the theory of Aristotle of natural slavery is not applicable in the case of the indigenous peoples (Las Casas 1967; 1974; Pagden 1987: 27–56). Instead, he asserts that they are rational and moral human beings living in advanced societies and accordingly can be disposed for Christianity. He argues that the indigenous peoples possess universal and individual rights under natural law. The only 'barbaric' characteristic of indigenous peoples, according to Las Casas, is the fact that they are so-called 'heathens' – but this does not in itself make them natural slaves. Moreover, he claims that 'idolatry' and 'savage' religious practises are deplorable and demonstrate a lack of knowledge. Las Casas vehemently maintains the possibility to convert indigenous Americans through peaceful persuasion and not by violence (Hanke 1959; Hanke 1974; Losada 1971).

Aristotle, the Bible, Church Fathers, Christian theological writings and natural law theories guide the arguments of Sepulveda. Contrary to Las Casas ´ who had spent many decades in the Americas, Sepulveda had no first-hand ´ knowledge of indigenous philosophies and in addition no experience of indigenous cultures and languages. His information on the indigenous peoples has its source in the writings of the Spanish historian Fernandez de Oviedo. Las ´ Casas is known as 'Protector de los Indios'. In defending the rights of the American indigenous peoples he argued against the Spanish brutal colonization. Las Casas' arguments were inspired by the ideas of the School of Salamanca and in particular the Spanish Dominican professor of theology, Francisco de Vitoria (or de Victoria) (1480–1546), from the University of Salamanca (Vitoria 1989; Williams 1990: 96–108).

Las Casas influenced the papal bull, *Sublimis Deus* (1537), by Pope Paul III. This bull established the status of the indigenous peoples as rational beings, who were not to be enslaved, were to be recipients of the Catholic faith and capable of the possession of private property (Hanke 1959; Hanke 1974: 17–22; Losada 1971; Veiteberg 1994). Despite his emphasis on tolerance and respect for human beings of another ethnicity and culture, the anthropology of Las Casas suffers a quite important moral weakness: people are categorized as 'barbarians' if they do not adhere to Christianity.

#### **The dignity of the practices of indigenous religions**

Las Casas claims that indigenous peoples were to some extent superior to many Christian settlers (Losada 1971: 287, 292–9). Furthermore, he apparently supports the posterior Article 1 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948). But this principle does not apply to non-Christian religious peoples.

Both Sepulveda and Las Casas establish their view of the humanity of indige- ´ nous peoples upon the conception of natural law developed by Thomas Aquinas (*c*.1224/5–1274) in *Summa Theologica* (Veiteberg 1994: 64). The law of nature is 'nothing else than the rational creature's participation in the eternal law of the Christian God' (Aquinas 2006: I-II.94). Although both claim to base their position on natural law tradition after Aquinas, Sepulveda denies indigenous ´ peoples the capability to possess dignity but, as Las Casas emphasizes similarity, he ascribes them a form of human dignity, although only as Christians. Indigenous people have the *potential* of becoming dignified after converting to Christianity. Las Casas here represents an early example of the mentality of many missionaries of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries; indigenous peoples were conceived not as heretics but as pagans, who until now had not enjoyed the privilege of knowing the Christian religion (Losada 1971: 300; Las Casas 1974: 44). As a representative of a 'developed' people, he perceives his role as a peaceful intervener assisting an 'underdeveloped' people to convert (Losada 1971: 296–8) to the only 'true' religion.

Human beings who are not Christians belong to what Las Casas names the 'fourth category of barbarians' (Pagden 1982: 134–5; Losada 1971: 285). Founded upon the words of St John Chrysostom, Las Casas has the following concept of the nature of human beings (Hanke 1974: 96):

Just as there is no natural difference in the creation of men, so there is no difference in the call to salvation of all of them, whether they are barbarous or wise, since God's grace can correct the minds of barbarians so that they have a reasonable understanding. (Las Casas 1974: 271)

Las Casas operates from the theoretical foundation of Catholic theology as divine truth.2 His argument with Sepul ´ veda was principally over the methodology of conversion from indigenous religions to Christianity (Lunenfeld 2011). But Las Casas maintains that there is no humanity in the faith and practice of a non-Christian religion. It is evident that Las Casas has made a great contribution to the acknowledgment of and regard for indigenous peoples, and in this respect the legacy of the Council of Valladolid is important. But Las Casas fails to recognize the worldview and intellectual heritage of indigenous peoples of the Americas, which represents their interconnected collective and individual dignity.

#### **The doctrine of discovery and the dignity of self-determination**

The failing of primarily Sepul ´ veda and to a lesser degree Las Casas at the Council of Valladolid to recognize the dignity of the belief and practice of a non-Christian religion has repercussions in the politics and law concerning indigenous peoples today. In the post-colonial period, nation states had a limited respect for the right of self-determination of the territories belonging to non-Christian indigenous peoples.

An inalienable right to *dominium rerum* or property could only apply to rational human beings created in the image of God (*imago dei*) according to

2 Cf. Victoria/Vitoria's three fundamental arguments (Williams 1990: 97–108).

Thomistic humanist natural-law principles of the relations between humans and nations (Pagden 1987: 80–90). At the Council of Valladolid, it was disputed whether indigenous peoples were capable of self-determination of territory. As opposed to de Vitoria and Las Casas, Sepulveda argued that indigenous peoples ´ lacked civilization violating and abusing the laws of nature and therefore did not have this right (Pagden 1987: 90–2).

The theoretical position of Sepulveda disclaiming indigenous peoples a right ´ to self-determination of land has prevailed in the colonial and contemporary (post-colonial) periods through the judicial-theological 'doctrine of discovery'. Papal bulls3 of the fifteenth century (also known as 'doctrine of Christian discovery') gave Christian explorers the 'right' to claim territories they 'discovered', i.e. any land that was not inhabited (*terra nullius*) by Christians, i.e. devoid of human beings. The Spanish principle of 'just war' or a violent 'right' to occupy indigenous land was accordingly upheld. The doctrine of discovery is a concept of law in various countries of the Americas undermining the right and dignity of indigenous peoples.

#### **References**

- Aquinas, T. 2006. *Summa Theologia: Latin Text and English Translation, Introductions, Notes, Appendices and Glossaries/St Thomas Aquinas*, ed. T. Gilby. Cambridge University Press
- Aristotle. 1998. *Politics*, trans. C. D. C. Reeve. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett
- Hanke, L. 1959. *Aristotle and the American Indians: A Study in Race Prejudice in the Modern World*. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press
	- 1974. *All Mankind Is One: A Study of the Disputation Between Bartolom´e de Las Casas and Juan Gin´es de Sep´ulveda in 1550 on the Intellectual and Religious Capacity of the American Indian*. Northern Illinois University Press
- Las Casas, B. de. 1966. *Tratados*. 2 vols. Fondo de Cultura Economica, Mexico ´
	- 1967. *Apologetica histora sumaria*. 2 vols. Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Instituto de investigaciones historicas, Ser. de historiadores y cronistas de Indias No. 1, 'Mexico' ´
	- 1974. *In Defense of the Indians*, trans. S. Poole, C. M. DeKalb. Northern Illinois University Press
- Losada, A. 1971. 'The Controversy Between Sepulveda and Las Casas in the Junta of ´ Valladolid', In J. Friede and B. Keen (eds.), *Bartolom´e de Las Casas in History: Toward an Understanding of the Man and His Work*. Northern Illinois University Press, 279–307
- Lunenfeld, M. 2004. 'Las Casas, Bartolome de' ( ´ 1474–1566), in *Europe, 1450 to 1789: Encyclopedia of the Early Modern World*, www.encyclopedia.com (visited 9 November 2011)
- Pagden, A. 1982. *The Fall of Natural Man: The American Indian and the Origins of Comparative Ethnology*. Cambridge University Press

3 www.doctrineofdiscovery.org.

- 1987. 'Dispossessing the Barbarian: The Language of Spanish Thomism and the Debate over the Property Rights of the American Indians', In A. Pagden (ed.), *The Languages of Political Theory in Early Modern Europe*. Cambridge University Press, 79–99
- Sepulveda, J. G. de. ´ 1951. *Dem´ocrates Segundo o de las Justas causas de la Guerra contra los indios*, ed. A. Losada. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientif´ıcas, Instituto Francisco de Vitoria
- Veiteberg, A. 1994. *Erobring og menneskesyn: Ein id´ehistorisk studie av Bartolom´e de Las Casas og Juan Gin´es de Sep´ulveda og deira syn p˚a indianarne i kjølvatnet av den spanske erobringa av Amerika*. Hovudfagsoppgave i id ˚ ehistorie. Universitetet i Oslo ´
- Vitoria, F. de. 1989. *Doctrina sobre los indios (Los Dominicos y America)*. Editorial San Esteban
- Williams, R. A. 1990. *The American Indian in Western Legal Thought: The Discourses of Conquest*. Oxford University Press