

---

### Human dignity and socialism

GEORG LOHMANN∗

#### **Conceptual clarifications: general overview**

The concepts of human dignity and socialism are both extremely indefinite and should here be understood in a broad sense. I will only briefly indicate how the concept 'human dignity' is here used (Lohmann 2013). Historically, social conceptions of a *particular* dignity and honour (for example, of a position, of a class, due to special achievements) can be differentiated from conceptions of *general* dignity accorded to all humans (for different reasons: for example ontological position in the cosmos, capacity to reason, creation in the image of god). Since the new beginning of international law after the Second World War, *universal* human dignity has been tied to the possession of human rights. Human dignity as a 'basis' of human rights is a morally grounded norm enacted as nationally and internationally applicable law through the shaping of political will. To respect, protect and guarantee these rights are in the first instance duties of the respective state, second of all states, and by means of a 'horizontal effect' of all humans as well. The content of 'human dignity' refers to the capabilities of humans for free, reflected self-determination, to their equal legal recognition and self-recognition and to the conditions of a minimum subsistence level which allow a *life worthy of human dignity* (in German, *menschenw¨urdiges Leben*).

'Socialism' is an equally encompassing concept applicable to different conceptions of society which aspire to a social organization of the economy, of ownership structures, of society and/or of the state in criticism of capitalism and its associated individualism. Historically, the concept first appears as a category of philosophy of law (*sozialismo*, A. Buonafede, 1798), following Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf, in order to establish natural law on the basis of sociability against catholic views (Schnieder 1984). In England, the concept has been used only since 1837 for the designation of Robert Owen's visions of society (Cole 1962). The development of socialist movements and corresponding conceptions range from early socialism (or, in Engels' terms, 'utopian socialism', 1789–1848) in France, Marx' scientific socialism and numerous variations (anarchistic socialism, state socialism, reform socialism, market socialism,

<sup>∗</sup> Translated by Joana Rancine.

democratic socialism etc.), the creation of labour unions and socialist, communist or social democrat parties in Europe to the present (Schnieder 1984; Wildt 2008). The different conceptions of socialism have highly differing normative ideas and demands. Not all, but particularly those standing in the tradition of Marx may be regarded as a protest against violations of dignity and of life worthy of human dignity. In the following I shall reconstruct the implicit role of the concept of dignity in the justification and articulation of socialist notions. I shall argue that the idea of 'a life worthy of human dignity' served to justify demands for social rights, in the German history of the labour movement in particular.

#### **Human dignity as (implicit) motive for the demands of the socialist labour movement**

Socialist models of society spring from two sources: social utopias and natural law. Ernst Bloch formulated their peculiarities and relations in a concise manner: 'Social utopias predominantly are about happiness, at the least to elimination of destitution and circumstances that maintain and produce it. Theories of natural law . . . predominantly are about dignity, to human rights, to juridical guarantees of human security and freedom, to categories of humane pride' (Bloch 1961: 234). In the course of history of socialist ideas, both demands intertwine: 'There is no human dignity without end of destitution, but also no human happiness without end of old or new subservience' (*ibid*.: 237). These developments, however, occur mostly without the term of human dignity explicitly playing a role. At most, it fulfils a marginal role in formulating demands of the labour movement or in conceptually determining and justifying norms or policies from the viewpoint of theoretical reflection.

The starting-point of early socialism is the affirmation of the radical declarations of human rights of the French Revolution, in which individual liberty rights are rejected as inadequate or too abstract and must be supplemented by general political rights (universal passive and active suffrage) and social rights ('social liberty') in order to realize equality and overcome misery (Bodeker ¨ 2004). As we also find with the American and French declarations of human rights, the term 'human dignity' does not at first play an explicit role. However, it does seem as if historically and systematically many demands and ideas of the socialist movements may be understood as a battle for the recognition of equal dignity for all humans (Habermas 2010), now expanded to include the battle against destitution and misery, in particular of course of the labour force.

In these battles, three (mostly implicit) references to dignity can be distinguished. First, the concept of *dignity of social class* is important since the 'fourth estate' – the labour force – now demands the same legal and political status, the same civil rights, as the victorious 'third estate'. Second, Kant's moral philosophical concept of 'universal dignity' plays a role, in that circumstances are (negatively) criticized in which workers are made into a means and are denied free self-determination. Third, a life 'worthy of human dignity' (in German, *adjectively* '*menschenw¨urdiges Leben*') is demanded; enabling a life without hardship and destitution and without insult and debasement, for the worker as for all humans through the achievements of his labour. All three aspects are 'contained' ('*aufgehoben*' in a Hegelian meaning of the word) in the concept of human dignity after 1945; the third encompassing aspect however characterizes socialist conceptions until today in particular.

#### **Marx: violations of human dignity and critique of human rights**

Marx' relationship to morality and law was ambivalent, as is well known. His critical view on morality and law, which he increasingly understood only as instruments for the assertion of class interests, is explicit and dominant. Human rights also appear to him 'as nothing else than' an expression of the self-centred interests of the bourgeoisie: as 'antiquated, empty phrases'1 that only affirm capitalist domination (Lohmann 1999). He also rejects as mere moralization the moral appeal to human dignity, for example in an overly harsh polemic against a rival in the socialist movement, Karl Heinzen (Marx 1959:344f). But, in contrast to Marx' self-interpretation, his critique of capitalist conditions should be reconstructed normatively. And the normative standards of his critique, understood rightly, are to all intents and purposes moral categories such as freedom, equality, justice, autonomy, self-realization or indeed also human dignity (Peffer 1990: 119f). His critique may therefore be understood much more accurately as if he had seen it as a demand for the universal respect of human dignity and as a realization of human rights. In this critical reading of Marx, the concept of human dignity obtains an accentuating and encompassing role in his criticism of capitalism. This appears in three respects.

#### Degradation ('Entwurdigung') ¨ as an encompassing category of the critique of capitalism

In his revolutionary critique, the early Marx formulates as his 'categorical imperative': 'To overthrow all conditions in which man is a debased, enslaved, forsaken, contemptible being!' (Marx 1972: 385f). This can be read as a negativistic designation of the complex, moral, but also legal and political standards of the critique which could have been explicated positively by reframing it in terms of 'conditions of life worthy of "human dignity" and "human rights"'. For the Marxist critique is not simply directed against destitution, deprivation, exploitation and unjust disadvantaging of the working classes, against poverty, misery and lack of freedom forced upon them, but also against degradation (*Entw¨urdigung*); deprivation of rights and political disempowerment, which their material and intellectual situation as a working class forces on them. These

1 www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ch01.htm.

are, as the scathing polemic Marx formulates: 'conditions which can hardly be better described than by the exclamation of a Frenchman when it was proposed to introduce a tax on dogs: "Poor dogs! They want to treat you like humans!"' (Marx 1972: 385). This means, positively formulated, that the Marxist critique directs itself against conditions where humans are treated like animals (dogs), i.e. where they are deprived of rights and dignity (Margalit 1996; Schaber 2003).

Dignity, indirectly addressed through the criticism of *violations* of dignity, constitutes the *encompassing* normative standard of the Marxist critique of capitalism. Marx first criticizes immanently the self-legitimization according to natural law (principally going back to Locke); and, interwoven with this, second, the farther-reaching violations of more comprehensive normative values like 'social freedom' and justice. Marx only indirectly refers to these values by expounding, in the historic passages of the*Capital* book, the political, moral and legal contradicting argumentations of the workers against their appropriation and repression ('subsumption' is Marx' corresponding term) (Lohmann 1991: 39–80). Asking oneself if these aspects of Marx' critique can be subsumed under one concept, the concept of 'degradation' appears suitable. With this, the concept of dignity, addressed only negatively, remains in the background but allows the understanding of the individual aspects of Marx' critique as moments of a concept of dignity, which then also co-determines the development of socialist ideas as a background concept.

#### Kantian influence: dignity as an end in itself and degradation as instrumentalization

Central to this position is the extensive use Marx makes of Kant's moral prohibition of treating human beings as a *mere* means. This is, according to Kant, a violation of human dignity because his autonomy (which is the foundation for the imperative of treating human beings always also as an end in themselves) is not respected. In this the young Marx operates still very (and perhaps too) broadly with a general prohibition of instrumentalization, which at times does not observe the Kantian 'merely', and simply rejects human beings becoming a means (Von Magnis 1975: 173f).

Marx advances an even explicitly positive relationship towards dignity in an article against the death penalty. He rejects a deterrence theory of the penalty because with it the individual human is misused as a means, and with Kant and Hegel he advocates a retaliation theory: 'From the point of view of abstract right, there is only one theory of punishment which recognizes "human dignity", in the abstract, and that is the theory of Kant, especially in the more rigid formula given to it by Hegel' (Marx 1973: 507). Important for Marx' reference to Kant is that he retains the normative, equal recognition of the dignity of every human being, but that he at the same time criticizes the Kantian conception of every human being's equal dignity, which Kant grounds in the absolute value of the 'free will' as too abstract and one-sided. Marx therefore attempts, on the basis of a positive reference to Kant, to put in place of the 'abstraction of free will' – which he regards as 'one among the many qualities of man' – the entire human being, 'man himself', 'the individual with his real motives, with multifarious social circumstances pressing upon him' (*ibid*.: 508), i.e. with needs and social relationships. This expansion of the concept of dignity also marks the manner in which Marx makes use of the Kantian prohibition of instrumentalization in the *Capital*.

Marx does indeed heed the Kantian 'merely' in the *Capital*: the wage labourer makes himself into a means, reifies his life and labouring capacity in selling them as his labour power. He does not, however, thereby make himself entirely *merely* into a means for the ends of his labour power's buyer, of the capitalist; he simultaneously sustains himself as a free person and is recognized as a free legal entity on the labour market. Marx' stance on human rights is ambivalent: on the one hand, he only talks ironically and defamatorily of this 'very Eden of the innate rights of man' (Marx 1974: 172), but on the other hand he emphasizes the *epochal*significance of this recognition: with the basic (and abstract) recognition of the wage labourer's dignity, insofar as he is recognized as a legal entity, 'a world's history' (*ibid*.:167) is made. Only on this basis is the class of free labourers formed, which, by asserting their 'right as sellers' (*ibid*.: 225) – for example in the 'determination of what is a working-day' (*ibid*.: 225) – make concrete what respect for their dignity comprehensively requires. One can therefore say in accordance with Marx not only that 'there enters into the determination of the value of the labour-power a historical and moral [*sic*!] element' (*ibid*.: 168), but also, now going beyond Marx, that this element enters into the determination of the respect of human dignity. Marx refers only negatively, via their violations, to these historic and moral elements of dignity. Increasingly, Marx invokes historical documents in which such violations of dignity are recorded (Lohmann 1991: 75f). These violations are, like the protest and battle against them, gradual, and in the historical documents an appropriate interpretation and demarcation of this 'merely as a means for alien ends' is disputed. The battle for an improved protection of dignity therefore unfolds as a historic battle over labourers' rights, for example in English Factory Acts extensively dealt with by Marx (Marx 1974: 264f). Wage labourers fight to no longer be treated merely as a means, i.e. as *arbitrarily replaceable* labour forces, but demand that the formal recognition of their legal status as free labourers is combined with social security *for every individual* which applies to all equally (hence the battle for free unions and against female and child labour).

#### Labour and life worthy of human dignity

The Kantian conception of dignity is based on intellectual autonomy; Marx is expanding this, as he sees it, 'abstract' dignity by arguing from an extensive anthropology. His anthropological starting-point has its ground in the philosophical tradition of Aristotle, Feuerbach and Schelling, which emphasizes the sensually *needy nature of humanity*; which affirms that human beings' capacities may only be developed in the context of the community. When Marx therefore demands social conditions of production and commerce, in which humans work 'under conditions *most* favourable to, and *worthy* of their human nature' (emphasis added);2 and on this basis ('realm of necessities') the 'development of human energy which is an end in itself' ('realm of freedom') 'can blossom forth' (Marx 1966: 828), then he demands a life worthy to a human nature understood as encompassing. Dignity is therefore not, as with Kant, grounded merely in the intellectual capabilities of humans and related to these alone but comprises the entire human being; his corporeality and his social and intellectual needs and capabilities. A *life worthy of human dignity* in accordance with an encompassing human nature does then not just extend to the respect for his capacity of autonomous self-determination but also to the fulfilment of immediate material necessities of life. Neither does it merely extend to the functional handling, rational control and social organization of the human metabolism with nature to be carried out through work, but also to the development of capabilities as ends in themselves and social relationships, which realize by full self-realization and self-enjoyment liberated ends and values in the process of historic civilization.

We can therefore, departing from Marx' determination of human nature, differentiate between three aspects of a life worthy of human nature: (1) the aspect of conditions for the sustainment of human life, which are to be generated by work and must be suitable for the material as well as intellectual human nature (subsistence); (2) the aspect of the abilities necessary for the satisfaction of intellectual and social needs and cultural requirements (social-political, good life); and (3) the aspect of self-realization of the human being through free abilities directed at play, art and self-enjoyment (self-realization). These aspects are not clearly separated but rather interwoven: needs are always culturally embedded; individuality is always social and politically imparted, and the whole is aligned along the end-in-itself character of 'teleological' and 'experimental self-realization' (Lohmann 2011). A life worthy of human dignity, then, is a life in which these three elements of human existence are accommodated.

Marx sees this life according to human dignity as realized through labour. However, Marx thereby over-extends the concept of labour because every human activity appears to be labour, and therefore labour alone appears as guarantee and execution of life worthy of human dignity. One can reverse this hypostatization of the concept of labour by defining 'labour and interaction' (Habermas 1969) as the ways in which a life worthy of human dignity may be realized. But Marx' insight is to be kept; namely, that a life worthy of human dignity encompasses the human mind *and body* and that it is achieved and ensured through labour and interaction. Out of this expansion of the classic

<sup>2</sup> A more direct translation: 'under conditions which correspond to and are *most fitting for* to a life according to *human dignity*'.

concept of dignity (compared for instance to that of Kant) new areas appear of what should be protected by human rights. Not only the classic liberty rights, but also social rights, which relate to economy, culture and social relationships, should be protected.

#### **Life worthy of human dignity and the right to work**

Further references to the demand of life worthy of human dignity through labour are added to the ideas of utopian socialism or early socialism and Marx' mostly negative reference to human dignity by the labour movement. Ferdinand Lassalle demands on 12 April 1862 that 'the sorrowful and plight-laden condition of the working classes' should be improved through work (through 'more abundant and secure employment') and that only as such the working classes may 'be helped towards a life truly worthy of human dignity ("menschenwurdiges Dasein")' (Lassalle ¨ 1919: 173). This demand was endorsed more generally and led to a battle for the 'right to work' (Gardner 2002: 257–91). In the Weimar Constitution of 1919, the labour movement's demand was formulated as follows: 'The economy has to be organized based on the principles of justice, with the goal of achieving life in dignity for everyone.'3 Finally, in particular in response to pressure from the communist states, a series of social rights were included in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. These are, according to the catalogue of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, socalled 'claim rights': individual rights to welfare, work, housing, education and cultural life. In international law, they have been institutionalized since 1966 in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

#### **Human dignity and social human rights: a socialist legacy?**

In contemporary conceptions of socialism, especially on the view of market socialism, the concept of dignity does not play a visible role. Social-liberal theories of society, as well as social rights, relate to human dignity only hesitantly. In John Rawls' *A Theory of Justice*, explicit reference is made neither to the Kantian nor to the socialist conception of dignity. Nevertheless, concepts and reflections central to Rawls' position may be reconstructed in this tradition; above all, the idea of the difference principle, of the just 'value of freedom' and the concept of self-respect (Rawls 1971: 204f, 440ff). Social human rights, following Rawls and in particular the ground-breaking book by Henry Shue (1980), are justified by justice (Gosepath 2004). Thereby the concept of human dignity plays an interesting, but also disputed, role in recent debates. I give two examples.

Critically against Rawls' one-sided list of fundamental resources and explicitly in reference to Marx (and Aristotle), Martha Nussbaum establishes a list of fundamental capabilities: 'All citizens are entitled to a threshold level of these ten capabilities because, I argue, all ten are necessary conditions of *a life worthy*

<sup>3</sup> Weimar Constitution, Art. 151, I. 1.

*of human dignity*' (Nussbaum 2008, emphasis added). In accordance with Marx and the socialist tradition, she demands, contrary to the stoic, Kantian view, 'that it is quite crucial not to base the ascription of human dignity on any single "basic capability" (rationality, for example)' (*ibid*.). Instead, she attempts to demonstrate with her anthropological approach that '[t]here is dignity not only in rationality but in human need itself and in the varied forms of striving that emerge from human need' (*ibid*.). Also, Jurgen Habermas advances the thesis ¨ that there existed from the very beginning, historically and systematically, a close relationship between human dignity and human rights (Habermas 2010: 344), because human rights may be understood as constituting protection against specific violations of human dignity. He thereby not only methodically adopts Marx' negativistic approach, but also sees, as in the above interpretation of Marx, 'human dignity as a 'moral source' from which spring the contents of all fundamental rights' (Habermas 2010: 345). For him, 'the experience of violated human dignity . . . [has] a function of discovery', which leads to and can lead to the justification (establishment?) of rights and the 'construction of *new* fundamental rights'. Thus, for him, as in the socialist tradition, the indirect reference to human dignity becomes the source of social fundamental rights as well: 'The experiences of exclusion, destitution and discrimination teach that the classic fundamental rights only then receive "the same value" (Rawls) for all citizens, when social and cultural rights *are included*' (*ibid*.: 346). With this approach, according to which 'human dignity . . . founds the *indivisibility* of fundamental rights' (*ibid*.: 347), Habermas then argues against one-sided and narrowing versions of human rights, as they can at present frequently be observed.

Both authors are examples of the socialist legacy in which the concept of human dignity plays an increasing role in arguing, not only for social human rights, but also for an encompassing list of all human rights. In this philosophical struggle, it still indeed remains to be shown that human dignity possesses this authenticating and establishing power.

#### **References**

Bloch, E. 1961. *Naturrecht und menschliche W¨urde*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp

- Bodeker, H. E. ¨ 2004. 'Der europaische Fr ¨ uhsozialismus und die Menschenrechte', ¨ *Mitteilungsblatt des Instituts f¨ur soziale Bewegungen* 31: 23–42
- Cole, M. 1962. 'Socialism', in *The Encyclopedia of Philosophy*, ed. P. Edwards. New York: Macmillan Company and Free Press, 467–70

Gardner, M. 2002. 'Das Recht auf Arbeit', in *Grund- und Menschenrechte: Historische Perspektiven – Aktuelle Perspektiven*, ed. M. Gardner *et al*. Vienna: Oldenburg

- Gosepath, S. 2004. *Gleiche Gerechtigkeit*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
- Habermas, J. 1969. 'Arbeit und Interaktion', in *Technik und Wissenschaft als Ideologie*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 9–47
	- 2010. 'Das Konzept der Menschenwurde und die realistische Utopie der Menschen- ¨ rechte', *DZPhil, Akademie Verlag* 58(3): 343–57
- Lassalle, F. 1919. 'Arbeiter Programm', in *Gesammelte Reden und Schriften*, vol. II. Berlin: Bernstein
- Lohmann, G. 1991. *Indifferenz und Gesellschaft: Eine kritische Auseinandersetzung mit Marx*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
	- 1999. 'Karl Marx' fatale Kritik der Menschenrechte', in *Politisches Denken: Jahrbuch 1999*, ed. K. Graf Ballesstrem, V. Gerhardt, H. Ottmann *et al*. Stuttgart, Weimar: Verlag J. B. Metzler
	- 2011. 'Experimentelle Selbstverwirklichung: Von Marx bis heute', in *Philosophie in Experimenten: Versuche explorativen Denkens*, ed. G Gamm and J. Kertscher. Bielefeld: Transcript, 259–82
	- 2013. 'Menschenwurde als "Basis" von Menschenrechten', in ¨ *Menschenw¨urde und Medizin: Ein interdisziplin¨ares Handbuch*, ed. J. C. Joerden, E. Hilgendorf and F. Thiele. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 179–94
- Margalit, A. 1996. *The Decent Society*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Marx, K. 1959. 'Die moralisierende Kritik und die kritisierende Moral: Beitrag zur Deutschen Kulturgeschichte', in *Marx Engels Werke*, vol. 4. Berlin: Dietz Verlag
	- 1966. *Das Kapital*. 3 vols., in *Marx Engels Werke*, vol. 25. Berlin: Dietz Verlag
	- 1972. 'Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie: Einleitung', in *Marx Engels Werke*, vol. 1. Berlin: Dietz Verlag
	- 1973. 'Die Todesstrafe Herrn Cobdens Pamphlet Anordnungen der Bank von England' (article from the *New York Daily Tribune* dated 18 February 1853), in *Marx Engels Werke*, vol. 8. Berlin: Dietz Verlag
	- 1974. *Capital*, vol. 1. London: Lawrence & Wishart
- Nussbaum, M. 2008. 'Human Dignity and Political Entitlements', in President's Council on Bioethics. 2008. *Human Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President's Council on Bioethics*. Washington, DC, http://bioethics.georgetown.edu/ pcbe/reports/human dignity/chapter14.html (accessed 21 April 2013)
- Peffer, R. G. 1990. *Marxism, Morality, and Social Justice*. Princeton University Press
- Rawls, J. 1971. *A Theory of Justice*. Oxford University Press
- Schaber, P. 2003. 'Menschenwurde als Recht, nicht erniedrigt zu werden', in ¨ *Menschenw¨urde: Ann¨aherung an einen Begriff*, ed. R. Stoecker. Vienna: Oestreichischer Bundes Verlag, 119–31
- Schnieder, W. 1984. 'Sozialismus', in *Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe: Historisches Lexikon zur politisch-sozialen Sprache in Deutschland*, ed. O. Brunner *et al*. Stuttgart: Ernst Klett, 923–96
- Shue, H. 1980. *Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and US Foreign Policy*. Princeton University Press
- Von Magnis, F. 1975. *Normative Voraussetzungen im Denken des jungen Marx (1843–1848)*. Freiburg im Breisgau, Munich: Karl Alber Verlag
- Wildt, A. 2008. 'Sozialismus', in Stefan Gosepath, Wilfried Hinsch and Beate Rossler ¨ (eds.), *Handbuch der Politischen Philosophie und Sozialphilosophie*, vol. 2. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1219–25