

---

## Human dignity in the Islamic world 

Miklós Maróth

Human dignity is a new concept which was unknown in antiquity and the early Middle Ages when Christendom and Islam appeared around the Mediterranean Sea. Consequently, when discussing traditional religions and cultures, scholars have to look for the various elements of these religions and cultures in various sources, and try to present them as a unified theory.

First, human dignity is not at the centre of interest of any religion, but man, through his relationship to God, comes to the fore. His partnership with God sets a high value on him. It is quite comprehensible that religions have to elaborate a concept of man, due to the fact that man is the other party in this relationship, and, as a consequence, they have to grant some kind of dignity to human beings as partners of God. Thus, the cultures created by various world religions are necessarily concerned with human beings, but their prevailing concept of human beings largely depends on their religious convictions. All this is valid for the Islamic religion too. Islam has a special view of human beings, and consequently, of human dignity too.

Second, the religion of Islam, like Judaism, is mainly concerned with the revealed divine law. The Islamic divine law known as *Shariʿa* contains the obligations of human beings towards God and towards each other, i.e. one's fellow men. All this implies that the legal prescriptions of the *Shariʿa* want to regulate primarily the conditions of private life. In the Islamic countries, everyday life in society has always been regulated by the ruler and his secular legal system (*siyasa*), which was rational and necessarily compatible with the *Shariʿa* (*siyasa sharʿiyya*). This second legal system, parallel to the first, is usually called *qanun* or *tanzimat*.

From these introductory words, it should be clear that, in examining the concept of human dignity in Islam, one has to see the problem from the point of view of the *Shariʿa* as well as from the point of view of the *qanun*, even if any kind of contradiction between them is precluded.

### **Human dignity in the Shariʿa**

The Arabic expression equivalent to 'human dignity' is *karamat al-insan*. Various forms of the root *krm* turn up in many Quranic verses in various contexts. The basic meaning of the root is 'to bestow honour upon' or 'to venerate' or 'to treat with deference'. According to the Quranic dictionary, its meaning is equivalent to *fad. d. ala*, which in turn means 'to like better' or 'to give preference to' (*Muʿjam alf¯az al-Qur'¯an* 1990: 962–4).

In Sura 17, one can find the word in its basic meaning, when we read that Allah commanded the angels to prostrate to Adam, which they did. The only one who protested was Iblis (Satan): 'Shall I prostrate myself along with one whom Thou hast created of clay? Tell me, Lord, can I submit to this one whom Thou hast honoured above me (*karramta ʿaleyya*)?' In this sentence, the meaning of the word is simply 'venerate' (Quran 17, 62).

In another passage of the same Sura, we read the following words: 'We have indeed honoured the children of Adam (*karramn¯a ban¯ı Adam*), and provided for them means of transportation in land and sea, and given them wholesome food and exalted them high above the greater part of Our creation' (Quran 17, 70). Here, the words 'to honour' imply that Allah provides for human beings with everything they need for a comfortable life. A similar meaning of the word turns up in many other passages. For example, in Sura 89, one can find the word '*karrama*' parallel to the word '*naʿʿma*' in the same sentence. The latter word has the meaning 'to provide with a life of ease'. The sentence is translated into English as follows: 'It is characteristic of man that when his Lord tries him and bestows honours (*akrama-hu*) and favours upon him (*naʿʿma-hu*), he boasts: etc.' Commenting the passage in Quran 17, 70 quoted above, al-Qurt.ub¯ı writes that man's privileged position (*karamat*) in creation is manifested in his tall stature and beautiful form, and in his ability to move equally well on land and water. This privilege was given to Adam's children only (Belhaj 2009: 196). All these quotations clearly indicate that God is the only source of *karam*, he it is who bestows *karam* on human beings. To put it in other words: *karamat* is not an inherent quality of man; it is a special gift of Allah.

In this case, one has to raise the question: who will be given *karam* by God? The answer is not surprising: 'Verily, the most honoured among you in the sight of Allah is he who is the most righteous among you' (Quran 14, 49). The word '*atq¯a*' in the text was translated here as 'most righteous', although the correct meaning of the expression is 'most pious', 'most God-fearing'. Thus, God gives *karam* to all human beings, but some of them will get less, some of them more of it, corresponding to one's devotedness. This is what contemporary Muslim writers refer to by the expression *al-takrim al-ilahi li-'l-insan* (Belhaj 2009: 196; al-Qurt.ub¯ı (undated): 125–6).

The next problem of *karam* is its meaning. As the previous quotations indicate, *karam* refers to an elevated position, special treatment, the result of which is a comfortable life. This conclusion will be confirmed by a quotation, in which one can read about the expulsion of sinners from the abundant region of Egypt: 'Thus we drove them forth out of gardens and springs, and treasures and pleasant abodes' (Quran 26, 58–9). Another passage runs as follows: 'They left behind many a garden and spring, and cornfield, and comfortable dwelling, and luxury in which they delighted' (Quran 44, 26–8). The expression *maqam kar¯ım* is translated in the first quotation as 'pleasant abodes', in the second one as 'comfortable dwelling'. Howsoever, the expression clearly implies a life in security, free of harm, in well-being and comfort. This is what a pious man deserves from God as a human and God-fearing creature.

The elevated position (*maqam kar¯ım*) of human beings implies free will. This means that in various situations of life human beings are free to decide whether they do something or not. In this respect, there is a serious difference between human beings and angels. The latter are only servants without any freedom in taking decisions. In the Quran, one can read about angels as follows: 'To Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and in the earth. Those who are in His presence do not disdain to worship Him, nor do they weary of it; they glorify Him night and day, and cease not.' Or: 'Those whom they so designate are only His servants. They utter not a word more than He directs, and they only carry out His commands. He knows what lies ahead of them and what is left behind them, and they intercede not except only he whose intercession He permits and they tremble with fear of Him' (Quran 21; 19–30). The difference between the positions of angels and human beings is well represented by the story of creation, where one can read the following story of the Quran, in which Allah speaks to the angels: 'We did bring you into being, then we gave you shape, then we commanded the angels: submit (prostrate) to Adam. The angels submitted (prostrated)' (Quran 7; 12). In light of this comparison of the free human beings with Allah's servants, it is no wonder that human beings are superior to angels. This passage of the Quran indicates that God has elevated human beings, made them free from all kinds of subjection, except the subjection to Him. In turn, God charged men with duties: the first one is the worship of God, as prescribed in the *Shariʿa*; the second one is creation of culture (in all meanings of the word '*cultura*') on Earth (Belhaj 2009: 196; al-Najjar 1995: 135).

The angels do not have choice: they can only obey the commands of Allah. Man as rational being, however, always has a choice, on which his dignity depends. If he obeys Allah he will be dignified, but if he rejects Allah's commandments he will be punished. Allah's commandments revealed to his chosen creature can be found in the Quran, and, consequently, Quran gives everybody a guideline on how to attain human dignity. This idea is expressed in the symbolic language of the Quran in the following way: 'We have now sent down to you a Book which makes provision for your uplift; will you not then understand? How many a township that acted wrongfully have We utterly destroyed, and raised up after it another people? When they perceived our chastisement, they prepared to flee from it. Flee not, but return to the comforts and luxuries in which you exulted so that you may be interrogated. At this they exclaimed: "Alas, we were indeed wrongdoers. They continued thus to bewail till We moved them down into stubble"' (Quran 21, 11–16).

Persons obeying Allah's commandments are elevated to the rank of His representatives (*khulaf¯a*') on Earth (Belhaj 2009: 196; ʿOthman 1983: 62). This summary means that the Quran speaks of human dignity usually in terms of morals, and not in terms of law (Belhaj 2009: 196; Bielefeldt 2000: 109).

Pious men will be dignified; the impious ones will be humiliated. This essential truth was summarized by Izzeddeen al-Khateeb al-Tameemi, the chief *qadi* in Jordan, in his book about the social concepts of contemporary Islam in following words: 'So, human dignity originates from Divine Will and the immortal law of God. Hence, human dignity is inseparable from a human being whether a male or female, irrespective of colour, time, place, social position, prestige among people, age, even if still a foetus, or dead lying in his grave' (al-Tameemi 2003: 462). And later he adds: 'In other words, dignity and human beings form a syndrome that never part with each other. Dignity is an admirable value in human being's life. Human esteem does not emanate from universal declarations, international resolutions, regional agreements or inter-state conferences. Commitment to it from an Islamic standpoint is based on doctrine, not on accidental interest or temporal benefits' (*ibid*.). Thus, the real firm basis of human dignity is the doctrine of Islamic religion which has been derived from the Quran. I will now elaborate how al-Tameemi understands the concept of human dignity. The highest value is human life. The *Shariʿa* of God has preserved the human lifeblood, honour, lineage and species. All these are high values adopted for safeguarding human society from violation and chaos. For this reason, God's Law has forbidden encroachment on human life. The next item of human dignity is marriage of a man and a woman. Any kind of sexual intercourse without legal marriage contract is forbidden. Such intercourse is defined as adultery, which should be abstained from under all conditions. The next constituent part of human dignity is good reputation. For this reason, calumny 'is a major sin whether done in public or in private where only God will hear it, and in this case it will be viewed as an audacity towards God' (*ibid*.: 471). And the text continues: 'Indeed, defamation is a major sin whether against Muslim or dhimmi.'

These words are thought-provoking. In the two previous cases, *dhimmis* (non-Muslims who belong to a world religion having a sacred book, i.e. Jews and Christians) were not mentioned. How shall we understand that, in the case of calumny, a special reference has been made to non-Muslims? Does it imply that in the case of murder and adultery the conditions are not extended to non-Muslims? And how shall we understand the fact that many other human beings (those who are neither Muslims nor *dhimmis* – a group to which the vast majority of humanity belongs) are not mentioned here at all? Are they excluded from the interdiction of calumny? Shall we understand human dignity as something bestowed by God mainly on Muslims, and to some degree on those living together with Muslims? These doubts, in conjunction with the words of the Quran that say that the Quran is the source of dignity, lead to the conclusion that there is an inequality in respect of human dignity between Muslims and non-Muslims, between owners of a sacred book and between members of all other religious communities.

Izzeddeen al-Khateeb al-Tameemi at any rate comes to the conclusion that 'Islamic Shariʿa has banned everything that disturbs the security of society, and threatens its high values. Shariʿa also prohibits anything that may endanger individuals' lives, honour, minds and property. So it has proscribed prostitution, promotion of lewdness and its printed matters, unseemly actions, rape, adultery, sodomy, lesbianism' (*ibid*.: 474). The text goes on to say that 'penal laws currently prevalent in the world, however, lean toward laxity in penalizing rape or flagrant violation of ethical codes. They often acquit those who commit such crimes or give them disproportionately low sentence . . . Wronged people therefore take the law into their hands because they are not convinced that law will do them justice or quench their anger.'

Thus, constituent elements of human dignity are security and safety in the life of society and compliance with the written and unwritten Code of Conduct in private life. Violation of the valid ethical judgment of the majority and the toleration of the deviant lifestyle of a minority forced by state authorities (in some countries) is an offence against human dignity. Security in private life and compliance with an unwritten code of conduct means, at the same time, the prohibition of 'spying, snooping, and searching for other people's defects and faults.' This rule is derived from the prophetic tradition. According to the tradition, Mohamed said to one of his followers: 'If you trace privacies of other people, you will corrupt or spoil them or you have almost done that.' Respect for privacy is thus a constituent element of human dignity, and human dignity is not separable from the dignity of the family. According to these statements, the necessary condition of human dignity is the safe and secure family life. Safe and secure family life excludes 'ill-treatment of children by their parents, laxity of upbringing, discrimination between them, and overuse of violence in dealing with them' (*ibid*.: 475). (These words imply that moderate corporal punishment is not excluded.) The author derives this claim from the following passage of the Quran: 'O you who believe, safeguard yourselves and your families against a fire whose fuel is men and stones, over which are appointed angels, stern and severe, who disobey not Allah in that which He commands them and do as they are directed' (Quran 66, 7).

So far, the following conclusions can be drawn from what has been said: human dignity is given by Allah to all those pious persons who live according to his commandments. The source of human dignity is the religion of Islam; more precisely the truth revealed by God and contained in the Quran.

Human dignity is not limited to the lifetime of individuals, because human beings deserve dignity before birth as well as after death. The embryo, the dead corpse and the living human being equally have human dignity, but the meaning of 'human dignity' is different for each of them. Human dignity excludes all kinds of behaviour that does not comply with the general rules of nature: for example, marriage between man and woman complies with the rules of nature, and, consequently, with human dignity. On the contrary, all other relationships must be regarded as not complying with the rules of nature; accordingly, they must be taken as an offence against human dignity.

As Milliot and Blanc puts it, the divine law rules the entire field of human actions (Milliot and Blanc 2001: 173). Its aim is to proclaim God's glory and to promote the comfort and welfare of people both in this life and in the afterlife. Immortality of the soul is the basis of the human dignity that was not mentioned up to now. The law will control human life in this world for the sake of one's eternal life in the world to come. The purpose of human life on Earth is to attain the degree of a perfect being, and so to attain proximity (*qurba*) to God in the afterlife. The temporary, this-worldly aim of the law is to regulate human actions in compliance with the necessities of the social life, and for this purpose the law puts restrictions on the actions of human instincts. The latter are given by God to the people to mark the fields of freedom of human actions: self-preservation and reproduction. The main task of the religious law is to ensure the welfare and well-being of people. As we understand from the previous passages, the welfare and well-being of man constitutes his dignity. Thus, the fundamental purpose of *Shariʿa* is to defend human dignity. Pious people who obey the divine law will pay attention to other people's dignity, and accordingly, in a pious society, human dignity will be the main value.

One can say, in short, that, from the point of view of the Islamic religion, human dignity is the result of Allah's dignifying action (*takrim*). This action implies that man is Allah's deputy (*khalifat*) on Earth, which is proven by his outward form, his position in creation. Human dignity is thus not the result of international legal agreement, its origin is not a decision taken by humans themselves. This implies that man has obligations towards God; these are fixed in the *Shariʿa*. In exchange for fulfilling obligations man was granted rights (*h. uquq*) too, and this means mainly a secure, good life.

There is, however, one open question: does everybody have the same dignity, or is the dignity of mankind in general limited to some elements only, while some other elements are given to those only who are pious Muslims? From what has been said, various conclusions may be drawn. It seems that all human beings have the same gifts as far as man's place in the creation is concerned. This must be a matter of general agreement. It is not clear whether the other elements of human dignity (secure life and what is connected with it) are part of the dignity of all human beings.

Some Muslim authors are ready to acknowledge that human dignity as such is given to everybody, while some others exclude from human dignity everybody who is not a devoted Muslim (Belhaj 2010: 204; 1 Kramer ¨ 2004: 138).

<sup>1</sup> As Abdessamad Belhaj puts it: 'The sacred nature of human beings does not only apply to Muslims: it is extended to all those with whom Muslims have made peace treaties . . . or defence treaties . . . Nevertheless, certain interpretations inside the Muslim world tend to dehumanize non-believers. Unlike the mainstream interpretation that understands the concept of *karama* as being concerned with all human beings as children of Adam, these radical interpretations restrict its sense to believers who actively practise their faith.'

#### **Human dignity in qan´ un`**

Now let us consider the meaning of human dignity from the point of view of the generally accepted *qanun* of the Islamic countries. The document under consideration was adopted by leading politicians of the Muslim countries in Cairo.2 The first sentence of this document in the introduction refers to what has been said in the previous part of this chapter: man is the deputy of God on Earth, and this fact defines his position: '[The Nineteenth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers,] keenly aware of the place of mankind in Islam as vicegerent (*khalifat*) of Allah on Earth . . . agrees to issue the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam that will serve as a general guidance for Member States in the Field of human rights.' The document, imitating Western political language, speaks of 'human rights', but this fact does not imply any contradiction: here human rights are derived from human dignity. As a matter of fact, the document starts with a doctrine that serves as the most important explanatory principle in the Islamic theory of human dignity. In the next paragraph this aim is explained in more detail. Knowing what has been said in the previous section in relation to the *Shariʿa*, it will be comprehensible that the Islamic *Umma* (community of all Muslims) is taken to be the best community Allah gave to mankind, in which this life is in harmony with the life to come, knowledge is in harmony with faith. This community, on the basis of its civilization that was created by Islam and the ministers, will give a clear solution 'for all chronic problems of this materialistic civilization' in respect of human dignity. The aim of the document is further to 'affirm his [i.e. mankind's] freedom and right to a dignified life in accordance with the Islamic *Shariʿa*'. The adjective 'dignified' suggests that, in speaking of human rights directly, the document speaks of human dignity indirectly. It is openly stated that the success of this aspiration cannot be achieved without taking into consideration the Islamic Law, i.e. the Islamic *Shariʿa*. The two closing provisions, Articles 24 and 25, return to the same idea emphasizing the explanatory role of the Islamic *Shariʿa* in everything what has been said in the previous twenty-three articles. The ambiguity of the *Shariʿa*, however, is present in this secular document too. In Article 1, there are two paragraphs. The first paragraph states the following:

All human beings form one family whose members are united by their subordination to Allah and descend from Adam. All men are equal in terms of basic human dignity and basic obligations and responsibilities, without any discrimination on the basis of race, colour, language, belief, sex, religion, political affiliation, social status or other considerations. The true religion is the guarantee for enhancing such dignity along the path to human integrity.

<sup>2</sup> The Nineteenth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers (Session of Peace, Interdependence and Development), held in Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt, from 9–14 Muharram 1411H (31 July to 5 August 1990).

The last sentence of this paragraph seems to contradict the previous ones, depending on the explanation of the words 'true religion'. Does it mean that Islam is the source for human dignity as such, or does it mean that a sincere and deeply held religious conviction of anybody attached to any religion can be the basis of human dignity? The next paragraph seems to be as ambiguous as the first one was:

All human beings are Allah's subjects, and the most loved by Him are those who are most beneficial to His subjects, and no one has superiority over another except on the basis of piety and good deeds.

As far as the constituent elements of human dignity are concerned, the document gives the list known from the previous section (sanctity of life, good fame, honour, secure life, etc.), except that the argumentation is different from the one we presented there.

#### **References**

- al-Najjar, ʿA. ʿO. 1995. ʿAq¯ıdat takr¯ım al-insan wa atharuha 'l-tarbawiyya', *al-Muslim al-Muʿas. ir* 74: 135
- al-Qurt.ub¯ı, Abu¯ ʿAbdallah. Undated. ¯ *al-J¯amiʿ li-aIk¯ ˆ am al-Qur'¯an*, ed. ʿAbdallah al- ¯ Turk¯ı. Beirut: Mu'assasat al-risala ¯
- al-Tameemi, Izzeddeen al-Khateeb. 2003. *Islam and Contemporary Issues*. Amman
- Belhaj, A. 2009. 'Karamat al-ins ¯ an emberi m ¯ elt ´ os´ ag', in ´ *Az iszl´am politikaelm´elete; Terminol´ogiai vizsg´alat*, ed. M. Maroth. Piliscsaba: Avicenna Kiad ´ o´
	- 2010. *Muslim Political Theory: A Comparative Terminological Investigation*, ed. M. Maroth. Piliscsaba: Avicenna Institute of Middle Eastern Studies ´

Bielefeldt, H. 2000. '"Western" Versus "Islamic" Human Right Conceptions?: A Critique of Cultural Essentialism in the Discussion on Human Rights', *Political Theory* 28(1)

- Kramer, G. ¨ 2004. 'La politique morale ou bien gouverner a l'islamique', *Vingtieme Siecle; Revue d'histoire* 82
- Milliot, L., and Blanc, F. P. 2001. *Introduction a l'´etude du droit musulman*. Paris: Dalloz *Muʿjam alf¯az al-Qur'¯an*, al-Qahirat. ¯ 1990. ed. Majmaʿat al-lughat al-ʿarabiyya
- ʿOthman, M. F. 1983. *Iuq¯uq al-insan baina 'l-shar¯ ´ ıʿat al-islamiyya wa 'l-fikr al-qan¯un al-gharb¯ı*. Dar al-Shuruq¯