

---

### Social and cultural presuppositions for the use of the concept of human dignity

GESA LINDEMANN

From a sociological point of view, human dignity is to be grasped as a societal phenomenon, the analysis of which is concerned with identifying the historical circumstances for the emergence of the concept of human dignity. The assumption that every living human being is 'born free and equal in dignity and rights'1 is understood as a normative social institution. In other words, from a sociological perspective, human dignity is conceived as a structural feature of modern societies, which are characterized by functional differentiation. The latter is either defined by an advanced division of labour (Durkheim 1930), or by the idea that there are diverse thematic fields of communication such as science, politics, law, economy, family etc., that are all assumed to be structured by different patterns of action/communication (Luhmann 1997). Functional differentiation requires that human beings recognize each other as individuals who are able to follow different patterns of action/communication. As individuals they are expected to be able to act not only as a scientist, but also as a mother, a shareholder or a member of a political party etc. The role of expectations within different realms of action are diverse and even contradictory and it is up to the individual to manage this complexity. Emile Durkheim (1950) argued that such societies first evolved in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in Europe and North America, a thesis that was subsequently developed further by Niklas Luhmann (1965). According to Durkheim and Luhmann, the structure of functional differentiation demands that there be individuals whose dignity is recognized. This idea forms the current basis of sociological reasoning on human dignity (Verschraegen 2002; Joas 2008; Lindemann 2010a).

If each single member of the human family is assumed to be born free and equal in dignity and rights, identifying someone as a member of the human family serves as a generally valid criterion for delimiting the circle of those beings that have to be recognized as beings with dignity. Two questions arise with regard to this premise: (1) Do sociological accounts offer a description of how the subject of human dignity is identified? In other words, how did the idea of one human family consisting of equal members arise? (2) How does sociology understand the meaning of the predicate 'human dignity'? In other

1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Art. 1.

words, what does it mean to say that each member is equally endowed with inalienable human dignity?

#### **Human dignity as cult of the individual in a society based on the division of labour**

The French sociologist Emile Durkheim (1858–1917) was the first to develop a theory of human dignity in relation to social structures. According to Durkheim, although it is the interactions of human beings that produce society, 'society' has to be grasped as a unit in itself, independent of individual actors. Law and customs express a 'societal collective consciousness', which is external to the consciousness of actors and which exerts power over individual consciousness. This power is legitimate, because it is society that gives humanity its characteristic features. Society turns biological human beings into beings with the capacity to think and to use abstract categories (Durkheim 1912: 439f), and it is society that makes biological human beings into beings with the ability to follow moral rules (Durkheim 1924: Chapter II). Humans therefore have reason and morality only on ground of living in society.

If society is the precondition of reason and morality, human beings do not have dignity as such but only under particular societal conditions. In order to develop this Durkheimian idea, we need to look at the difference between modern and pre-modern societies. Pre-modern societies understand themselves in religious terms. The social order, which transcends the individual consciousness, is grasped as a sacred order. Moral rules, which are part of the societal collective consciousness, are conceived as sacred rules – guaranteed by transcendent beings like gods, demons and the like (Durkheim 1912). Modern societies are different: there are no transcendent beings at the centre of the moral order; the individual human person rather becomes a 'sacralized entity'. A 'cult of the individual' emerged due to the evolving 'division of labour in society' (Durkheim 1930: 407).

Durkheim describes pre-modern societies as segmentarily differentiated. This means that such societies consist of equally structured sub-units (for example, family clans) in which the relevant social labour is performed. Individual human beings are included more or less completely into such societal units; i.e. an individual normally belongs only to one unit. There is no significant division of labour among sub-units (Durkheim 1930). Such societies develop more or less clear-cut role expectations. Since role expectations are believed to be willed by God/gods, actors feel strongly obliged to follow the respective moral rules. The individual is a part of society as a whole, which itself has moral priority over the individual. (Durkheim 1950: Chapter V).

If a division of labour emerges and becomes a decisive feature of a society's structure, the situation changes fundamentally. Individuals are no longer included into only one sub-group or only into one form of labour. Instead, individuals are engaged in the division of social labour by being a family member and acting accordingly, by being a member of a professional group and acting accordingly, and so forth. Since individuals are no longer totally included in one sub-group, they can participate in different groups and different forms of labour. Birth no longer determines the work an individual has to perform. The daughter of a farmer may become a professor or a banker.

In advanced forms of the division of labour, individuals participate in social labour in different ways and belong to different social sub-groups. Nevertheless, the diversity of modern societies' moral obligations have a common basis. It is always assumed that human beings are capable of following different moral obligations in different situations. The more advanced the division of labour is, the more a society is dependent on individuals being capable of performing different kinds of labour in different sub-groups. It is the individual that has to handle diverse role expectations in an individual manner. Therefore, the notion of the individual person becomes a structural necessity for modern society. In this way, the individual human being comes to hold dignity.

It is important to keep in mind here that it is not the individual as a biological nor as a rational being who has dignity, but rather the individual as an emergent normative structural necessity of a functionally differentiated society. The concrete biological, individual human being has dignity as long as she/he obeys the basic normative necessities of functional differentiation. Since the basic normative feature of modern society is the concept of the dignified individual, an assault on the individual is an assault on the holy centre of modern society. Those who perform such an assault endanger their own status as dignified beings. Durkheim states explicitly that human beings whose behaviour is unworthy can even lose their dignity. Committing suicide or killing another human being are among the most severe assaults on the centre of the moral order of modern societies (Durkheim 1897:391). Durkheim thus conceptualizes a performance-based concept of dignity, not a concept of an inalienable dignity.

#### **Dignity as an individual accomplishment**

The German sociologist Niklas Luhmann (1927–98) is the founder of the theory of autopoietic social systems (Luhmann 1984; 1997). Luhmann's basic idea is that society does not consist of human beings, and instead is composed of communications. Therefore, every social phenomenon has to be understood as the result of communication. In order to define communication, Luhmann uses the analytical concept of double contingency between actors he refers to as ego and alter. Within this framework, ego and alter are conceived as selves. As such, ego and alter perceive their environment and act accordingly, i.e. they mediate perceiving and acting. The point of departure for Luhmann's analysis of the social order is that ego and alter make themselves mutually conditional upon each other in a highly complex fashion. From the perspective of ego, we could say that ego incorporates the behaviour of alter into her or his own behaviour by expecting that alter expects ego to make her or his own behaviour dependent upon alter. A double uncertainty emerges. Since ego and alter are different subjects, they cannot know definitively from each other how the other will behave. It follows that, if ego tries to accord his or her actions with the expected expectations of alter, ego will not definitively be able to know the future behaviour of either alter or ego. This uncertainty exists for ego as a phenomenon of practical relevance. The same holds true for alter. In order to mark out this highly insecure and complex relationship, Luhmann uses the term 'double contingency' (Luhmann 1984: Chapter 3).

In order to establish certainty, actors have to communicate how they make themselves dependent on the actions of others. Communication is the means by which ego and alter create a social order, i.e. social order is an emergent phenomenon created by ego and alter in order to solve the problem of double contingency. Society is understood as a cognitive as well as a normative order. Luhmann understands the creation of general categories guiding the perception of the external and internal world and of normative institutions guiding particular actions as a basic achievement of societal processes. Like Durkheim, Luhmann assumes that reason and morality are societal achievements that cannot be understood by looking at isolated individuals.

Different forms of societal differentiation indicate the various ways in which the problem of double contingency can be solved. Luhmann – like Durkheim – distinguishes between modern functionally differentiated society and premodern societies. Luhmann describes the latter as either segmentarily or stratificatorily differentiated. He understands segmentary differentiation similarly to Durkheim. Stratificatorily differentiated societies, according to Luhmann, are made up of sub-units – social strata structured in a variety of ways. These strata are distinguished by wealth and/or political or religious power. It is within such a society that elementary forms of functional differentiation can emerge. In medieval Europe, for example, the different status positions of clergy, nobility and common people (farmers, craftsmen) indicate not only that actors occupy different positions in a hierarchy, but also that they contribute to the existence of society in different ways. Individuals are nevertheless totally included in their respective social status group. As members of different status groups, individuals have different freedoms and obligations, different forms of honour and dignity, etc. Within a stratificatorily differentiated society, ego and alter solve the problem of double contingency by communicating to each other to which social stratum they belong. Society is produced as a stable order by continuously reproducing legitimate forms of hierarchical inequalities (Luhmann 1997: 678f).

Functional differentiation describes another solution to the problem of double contingency. Here, societal communication is structured thematically, following the various needs of a modern society. There is a need for producing binding decisions, that is satisfied by politically specified communication; the need for the production of goods is satisfied by the economic sub-system, and so forth. Luhmann does not assume that there is a universal set of societal needs that have to be satisfied. Instead, he conceives of the emergence of societal sub-systems as unforeseen ways of providing contingent solutions to the general problem of double contingency (Luhmann 1984: Chapter3). Functional differentiation has to be grasped as an open process.

The basic precondition of functional differentiation is that an individual as a whole does not belong to only one sub-system. Instead, ego/alter should have the possibility of participating in different sub-systems. This is guaranteed by fundamental rights, the institutionalization of which enables functional differentiation in a variety of ways. Freedom means that individuals have, in principle, the equal right to be included into every societal sub-system and can act economically, politically, as a family member and so forth (Luhmann 1965: Chapter 4). Individuals have dignity insofar as they are able to present themselves to others as a coherent personality, in which diverse communicative obligations of different societal sub-systems are integrated in a way that is consistent but specific – unique – to the individual. A personality should not only be able to act as a family member, a sales person or as a member of a political party and so on, but should also be able to communicate that he or she does so as an individual in his or her particular way. Presenting oneself as a personality thereby solves the problem of double contingency. Ego/alter have to display to each other that they are accountable, individual personalities. If they trust each other's communicative performance, they are able to establish a societal order with the individual personality as its nexus. It is the individual that integrates the diversity of functionally differentiated role expectations. The individual personality thereby becomes a structural feature of modern society. As such, the individual personality has to be generally respected. A human being has dignity because he or she presents his or herself as a personality (Luhmann 1965: Chapter 4). In a functional respect, we must distinguish from these general institutions (freedom, dignity) specific rights, which should rather be understood as institutional conditions for individual functional domains. Particularly prominent here is, for example, the right to property, which institutionally safeguards the differentiation of the functional domain of the economy (Luhmann 1965: Chapter 6).

Luhmann describes functional differentiation as a potentially self-destructive process, because sub-systems have a tendency to expand their particular pattern of communication such that a single pattern becomes the generally binding pattern of all societal communication. The development of functional differentiation is accompanied by the danger of de-differentiation. Luhmann regards the political system in particular as potentially dangerous: 'the danger of dedifferentiation, of the politicization of the entirety of communication, arises when the political system is socially emancipated and autonomized' (Luhmann 1965: 24; my translation). This means that every communication can potentially be treated as politically relevant. This renders the autonomous functioning of the other sub-systems (science, economy, education, etc.) impossible, because everyone must assume that her or his actions will cause a negative sanction by those in political power. Luhmann considers constitutions to be an evolutionary achievement by means of which the political system restricts itself from politicizing society as a whole.

Since, according to Luhmann, human dignity is an accomplishment, individuals can either succeed or fail to present themselves as a consistent personality. If they fail, they fail to reproduce the modern solution to the problem of double contingency. In that case, individuals endanger their recognition as competent communication partners and thereby their dignity status (cf. Luhmann 1965: 69).

#### **Dignity of the living human being as precondition of functional differentiation**

Durkheim and Luhmann argue that functional differentiation is up to now the only social order which gives the individual human being moral priority over transcendent entities (God, gods, demons etc.) or society as a whole. This argument treats the emergence of human dignity and individualization as closely interconnected. I suggest to combine especially Luhmann's theory of functional differentiation with the idea that it is open to question which entities should be conceived as social actors. Authors working in anthropology and sociology have shown that it is a particular feature of modern, i.e. functionally differentiated, societies that there is a clear boundary between nature and culture and between human beings and other entities (Luckmann 1970; Descola 2005; Lindemann 2010b). There are many societies without functional differentiation, in which animals, plants, demons, spirits and other beings are treated also as legitimate social actors. The lesson to be learned from these analyses is that the borders of the social world are historically changing. This indicates that every society has to solve the problem how to distinguish legitimately between social actors and other beings. I call this the problem of the 'contingency of the shared world' (Lindemann 2010b: 283).

If we take into account that the borders of the social world are subject to historical change, the analysis of Durkheim and Luhmann should be expanded. They argue that it is due to functional differentiation that the individual gains moral priority over society as a whole. But they take it for granted that only living human beings are social actors, and therefore only living human beings can become individuals with a moral priority over the whole. But this cannot be taken for granted, if we assume that the borders of the social world are open to historical change. It has to be described as a feature of a functionally differentiated society that only human beings are legitimate social actors, and therefore subjects of dignity.

Non-modern societies are characterized by a diversity of locally heterogeneous understandings of which entity has to be treated as a legitimate actor. In different local environments one can identify different kinds of actors: humans, animals, demons, spirits or gods, the deceased etc. (Descola 2005). Even within the legal systems of pre-modern Europe it was unclear for centuries, whether animals can commit a crime out of a free will and should therefore be prosecuted and sentenced to death (Evans 1906; Lindemann 2009: Chapter 3). The medieval and early modern forms of identifying legitimate social actors seem to be characterized by two features: on the one hand, not only humans but also animals or other-worldly beings (like demons) could be treated as social actors, and, on the other, there was hardly any recourse to a general criterion – valid across time and space. To give an example from the sixteenth century: the vineyards of Julien (France) were infested several times by weevils. First, the local episcopal court at St Jean-de-Maurienne decided that the weevils were sent by god to punish the local population. Thirty years later, weevils came back. Now the episcopal court decided that the weevils had come out of free will. Each party (local farmers and local weevils) had a lawyer and the court had to find a decision how to solve the conflict of interests between weevils and farmers (Evans 1906: 38f).

The emergence of functional differentiation in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries led to a new solution to the problem of the contingency of the shared world. An entity is to be recognized as a social actor, if it can be identified as a living human being. This criterion is claimed to be universal, it is valid across time and space. Here, local varieties of potential actors (animals, otherworldly beings, humans, etc.) were reduced to one kind of actor: human beings. These are assumed to be an open potential for communication, i.e. individual human beings are assumed to be in principle able to participate in diverse functional realms. The only restriction is that each individual human has to fulfil the requirements of a particular functional domain. To participate in the economic domain, an actor needs money or something to sell. To contribute to scientific communications requires actors who are educated enough and to display rational arguments.

The communicative structure of functional differentiation is characterized by a two-step mechanism of homogenization. Social actors address each other as human beings, i.e. as an open potential for communication (first step); additionally social actors are addressed according to the relevancies and particular role expectations of a functional realm. In the latter case, social actors treat each other mutually as a means to an end defined by what matters in a particular functional realm (second step). Within the economic realm, actors treat each other according to economic rationality and so forth.

On these grounds, it becomes possible to tell a slightly different story about functional differentiation and human dignity. Human dignity is the quality a being has as a generally recognized social person open to participation in diverse forms of communication. As a human being, a person has dignity because he or she is not only a means to an end within functionally specified communication, but also a human being beyond particular ends. As such, the human being within the context of functional differentiation is an end in him or herself. As an open potential for further communication, the human being is him or herself the precondition for an open process of functional differentiation (Lindemann 2010a).

While Luhmann sees the consistent presentation of individual personality as a nexus of the social order, here the crucial point is the openness for further communication. The criterion for being recognized as someone with human dignity is the sheer fact of being alive (Lindemann 2004). Such recognition does not require the exacting qualities of personal performance; on the contrary, such a requirement would be dysfunctional. Communication along the lines of particular sub-systems demands an exacting presentation of the self as a personal actor capable of calculating rationally (economic system), arguing consistently (science), etc. If such exacting performances were made relevant for recognizing someone's dignity status, it would make it impossible for forms of communication to occur that do not require such exacting qualities. Tying recognition to specifically defined forms of personal performance would endanger the fundamental openness of the communicative differentiation of society (Lindemann 2010a). One can describe this as the liberal threat to functional differentiation.

#### **Conclusion**

From a sociological perspective, the idea that there is one human family with equal members who have dignity has to be grasped as a modern achievement. Nevertheless, this achievement cannot be restricted to a particular cultural or religious tradition. Although the historical development indicates that this achievement has Christian roots, the notion of the this-worldly living human being having dignity transcends Christianity as well as every other religious or cultural foundation. Functional differentiation is in principle compatible with different religious and cultural traditions as long as these traditions are able to cope with the this-worldly living human being endowed with dignity.

Whereas Durkheim and Luhmann unfold performance-based concepts of human dignity, I proposed a different sociological concept of human dignity. Functional differentiation is described as a social order, which is in need of a general factual criterion of identifying social actors. Historically, this was achieved by institutionalizing the criterion 'living human being'. Each living human is endowed with dignity, because it transcends the ends of actual communications within particular societal domains. In this understanding, dignity can be lost only when the human being dies. It is a normatively required structural feature of the social order of functional differentiation that living humans are endowed with an inalienable dignity.

Nevertheless, functional differentiation is also a potentially self-destructive process, which itself can become a threat to the normative institution of human dignity. Luhmann has described this primarily with respect to the political realm, but other functional domains can also become potentially destructive. One even has to take into account a liberal threat to functional differentiation that would tie recognition as a person with dignity to a particular personal performance – for example the performance of the rational actor following his or her own self-interest that is demanded in the economic sphere. In this case, human dignity would be threatened by a dominance of the functional domain of the economy.

#### **References**

Descola, P. 2005. *Par-del`a nature et culture*. Paris: Gallimard

- Durkheim, E. 1897. *Le suicide: Etude de sociologie*. Paris: Alcan (trans. J. A. Spaulding and G. Simpson, 1951. *Suicide: A Study in Sociology*. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press)
	- 1912. *Les formes ´el´ementaires de la vie religieuse: le syst`eme tot´emique en Australie* (trans. J. W. Swain. 1915. *The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life*. London: Allen & Unwin)
	- 1924. *Sociologie et philosophie*. Paris: Alcan (trans. D. F. Pocock. 1953. *Sociology and Philosophy*. London: Cohen & West)
	- 1930. *De la division du travail social* (trans. G. Simpson, 1964. *The division of Labour in Society*. New York: The Free Press)
	- 1950. *Le¸cons de sociologie: Physique des moeurs et du droit*. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France (trans. C. Brook. 1958. *Professional Ethics and Civic Morals*, Glencoe, IL: The Free Press)
- Evans, E. P. 1906. *The Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals*. London: Faber & Faber
- Joas, H. 2008. 'Punishment and Respect: The Sacralization of the Person and Its Endangerment', *Journal of Classical Sociology* 8(2): 159–77
- Lindemann, G. 2004. 'Menschenwurde und Lebendigkeit', in E. Klein and C. Menke ¨ (eds.), *Menschenrechte und Bioethik, Schriften des MenschenRechtsZentrums*, vol. 21. Berlin: Berliner Wissenschafts-Verlag, 146–73
	- 2009. *Das Soziale von seinen Grenzen her denken*. Weilerswist: Velbruck ¨
	- 2010a. 'Moralischer Status und menschliche Gattung Versuch einer soziologischen Aufklarung', ¨ *Deutsche Zeitschrift f¨ur Philosophie* 58(3): 359–76
	- 2010b. 'The Living Human Body from the Perspective of the Shared World (Mitwelt)', *Journal of Speculative Philosophy* 24(3): 275–91
- Luckmann, T. 1970. 'On the Boundaries of the Social World', in M. Natanson (ed.), *Phenomenology and Social Reality: Essays in Memory of Alfred Schutz*. The Hague: Nijhoff, 73–100
- Luhmann, N. 1965. *Grundrechte als Institution*. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot
	- 1984. *Soziale Systeme: Grundriß einer allgemeinen Theorie*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
	- 1997. *Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft*, 2 vols. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
- Verschraegen, G. 2002. 'Human Rights and Modern Society: A Sociological Analysis from the Perspective of Systems Theory', *Journal of Law and Society* 29: 258–81