

---

### Human dignity: can a historical foundation alone suffice? From Joas' affirmative genealogy to Kierkegaard's leap of faith

 CHRISTOPH HUBENTHAL ¨

Among the manifold attempts to provide the idea of human dignity and the related human rights practice with a historical foundation, Hans Joas' 'affirmative genealogy' is surely one of the most innovative and striking methodological approaches being presented during the last few years. If one wishes to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of this foundational type in general, Joas' account undoubtedly offers an excellent example of how to do this. For the purpose of such an examination, however, it is necessary first to examine the underlying argument motivating Joas' methodological decisions.

For Joas, somewhere in the eighteenth century a major cultural shift took place whereby the human person progressively became a sacred object. The outcome of this process was the emergence of an ethical value that Joas designates as the *sacredness of the person*. Different codifications of human rights and the establishment of a related human rights practice can be seen as a significant consequence of this value appearance. Though Joas constantly emphasizes the historical contingency of value emergences, he is well aware that values do not appear from nowhere but have a specific history or, as he puts it, a *genealogy*. In case of the sacredness of the person, it was the traumatic experience of violence, oppression and misrecognition that led to the emergence and experience of this value. Nowadays, however, the sacredness of the person seems to be endangered. 'Even in the core area of the West', Joas complains, 'there can be no talk of a secure consolidation of the sacredness of the person' (Joas 2011: 104). Likewise the meaning of this value threatens to become abstract, dogmatic or purely conventional so that it is in danger of being deprived of its affective power and the related human rights practice will lose its motivational basis. For Joas, it is exactly this endangering and threatening situation that generates the need for an affirmative genealogy. 'Affirmative genealogy' can thus be delineated as a method to revitalize original value experiences by means of a historical or narrative iteration of their genealogy. The revitalization, in turn, is necessary to motivate, encourage or even to extend the human rights practice. 'Value judgements', Joas says, 'point at stories. We make plausible – and in doing that we also defend – our value commitments by narrating how we have arrived at them and what will happen when they are offended' (*ibid*.: 259).

In a nutshell, Joas' systematic argument can thus be spelled out as follows: a value historically emerged, bore a corresponding practice, is now in danger and must therefore be re-affirmed through an affirmative genealogy. If we equate the sacredness of the person with human dignity (which Joas himself occasionally does), we are entitled to state that for Joas human dignity is to be affirmed by a narrative repetition of its historical genesis. Moreover, Joas is convinced that an affirmative genealogy *alone* can serve as cogent justification of human dignity, for which reason other justificatory methods might be of additional worth, but are not necessary. In the remainder of this chapter, I will, by contrast, try to show that any attempt to affirm a value by narrating its history unavoidably requires another justificatory step which, then, is to be seen as the actual foundation of human dignity.

#### **A problem with the affirmative genealogy**

Joas introduces the sacredness of the person as an ethical value; and of such values he explicitly says: 'It is these ethical values that historically arise and elapse' (*ibid*.: 156). From this we can, at least, conclude that human dignity is possibly a transitory value. This corresponds perfectly with the aforementioned observation that the sacredness of the person is a threatened and endangered value. Consequently, we have no guarantee that of all things human dignity will prevail, since it might be the case that the sacredness of the person will lose its affective binding forces and will cease to be an ethical value.

The question, then, is why should we revitalize this value by affirmatively iterating its genesis, that is, by employing an affirmative genealogy? Joas might probably respond that otherwise the human rights practice would also disappear. But again we could ask: why should we be interested in maintaining a particular practice when the underlying value is out of fashion and does not fascinate us anymore? If we cannot experience the value, why should we continue the practice?

#### **Kierkegaard's analogous problem**

Most notably, the challenge just identified in Joas is far from being new. None otherthan Søren Kierkegaard already struggled with an analogous problem and developed, as will be seen, a sophisticated answer simply by offering a thorough analysis of what it means to affirm a historical value.

In his *Philosophical Fragments* and the *Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments*, Kierkegaard raises the question of how a 'follower at second hand' can get access to the historical truth of Christianity because later generations obviously cannot be taught by the original teacher. So Kierkegaard supposes the historic emergence of a particular truth that the contemporaries experienced as ultimately valuable; and the problem for him is how later generations can get access to this truth. To have such access is for Kierkegaard of decisive relevance since it is this truth that gives shape to the entirety of life.1 Accordingly, Kierkegaard is also interested in the affirmation of a historic value for the sake of a current practice; and so it seems not entirely odd to state a crucial similarity between his and Joas' problem. But there is also a difference. Whereas Kierkegaard is interested in *how* we can affirm a historic value, Joas has no sufficient answer to the question *why* we should affirm such a value. Of course, this is not a negligible difference. By looking at how Kierkegaard resolved his how-problem, however, we can also get a clue how Joas probably might meet his why-challenge.

#### **Kierkegaard's solution**

In the *Philosophical Fragments*,Kierkegaard's central question is whether eternal happiness can be based on historical knowledge (Kierkegaard 1992: 15). For the purpose of answering this question, Kierkegaard introduces the aforementioned 'follower at second hand'. It is this follower who is interested in affirming a truth by which she can achieve eternal happiness. Interestingly, however, Kierkegaard makes extensive efforts to demonstrate that any utterance of a historic truth is merely an *approximation*. First, this is due to the epistemological fact that no historic episode or person can ever be reconstructed comprehensively. More important, however, is the axiological fact that even the most comprehensible reconstruction of a historic episode or person cannot, purely by itself, enforce the affirmation of its own truth. We must not assume, Kierkegaard says, that 'if only the objective truth has been obtained, appropriation is an easy matter; it is automatically included as part of the bargain and *am Ende* [in the end] the individual is a matter of indifference' (*ibid*.: 22). Apparently, for Kierkegaard the affirmation of a historical truth is impossible without a subject actively capturing and appropriating it. Historic truth, in other words, cannot impose itself upon the individual, but can become existentially relevant only on the condition that the subject freely decides to adopt it. However strong, affective or convincing a truth may be, without free and active adoption by the subject herself it cannot become the subject's truth.

As is well known, Lessing once wrote that 'contingent historical truths can never become a demonstration of eternal truths of reason', and elsewhere he said that 'the transition whereby one builds an eternal truth on historical reports is a leap' (*ibid*.: 93). Kierkegaard who quotes these statements, ironically ignores

<sup>1</sup> In a diary entry from 1 August 1835, Kierkegaard writes: 'What I miss, is to come to terms with myself on *what I ought to do*, not on what I ought to cognize, except insofar as cognition precedes action . . . It is necessary to find a truth that is *true for myself*, to *find the idea for which I will live and die*' (Kierkegaard 1962: 16) (English translation by the present author).

Lessing's critical undertone and endorses the utterances without reservation. He even emphasizes that the affirmation of historical truth is a leap, is aµεταβασις ´ ε*ἰ*ς *ἂ*λλ*ο* γεν´ *ο*ς (i.e. shifting from one genus to another), is a decision and an act of faith (*ibid*.: 98, 102).2 Elsewhere Kierkegaard also holds that faith can be gained 'only in freedom, by an act of will' (Kierkegaard 1985: 82). From this we may conclude that for Kierkegaard any truth, however valuable it may be, cannot accomplish its own affirmation. There is no specific *axiological condition* that can cause the value's appropriation by the subject. A comparable thing applies to the current situation. In order to leap, the subject cannot be conditioned by the historical context in which the decision is to be made. So there is neither an *axiological* nor a *historical condition* that causes the decision. Rather the chain of conditions must be interrupted, as it were, to make the decision possible. Kierkegaard uses different metaphors to express this lack of causation. He speaks of the 'transition from "not to be" to "to be"' (*ibid*.: 20), or he uses terms like 'moment' (*ibid*.: 43),3 'birth' or 're-birth' (*ibid*.: 21) to give utterance to the *unconditionedness* of the decision. Consequently, we cannot avoid taking notice of Kierkegaard's emphatic plea for the absoluteness of the deciding act by which a historic truth is affirmed. Each affirmative act, therefore, necessarily implies a spontaneous, unconditioned activity of the subject and cannot be explained solely by the historical circumstances or the attractiveness of the value affirmed.

At this point, it is of paramount importance to notice that exactly this absoluteness of the individual at the very moment of making her affirmative decision accounts for the *subject's dignity*. In *Either/Or* Kierkegaard writes: 'A human being's eternal dignity lies precisely in this, that he can gain a history. The divine in him lies in this, that he himself, if he so chooses, can give this history continuity, because it gains that, not when it is a summary of what has taken place or has happened to me, but only when it is my personal deed in such a way that even that which has happened to me is transformed and transferred from necessity to freedom' (Kierkegaard 1987: 250). This quotation convincingly shows that for Kierkegaard the construction of our own historicity presupposes the ability to distance ourselves from all historical givens in order to freely appropriate them. And it is this freedom, this unconditionedness, this absoluteness that accounts for the human dignity. Consequently, the human person is worthy and sacred precisely because she has the faculty to affirm what is valuable. She is neither conditioned by the value that is to be affirmed (*axiological conditionedness*), nor by the situation in which the affirmation is to be performed (*historical conditionedness*). Hence we can conclude that the

<sup>2</sup> 98: ' . . . precisely because the leap is a decision . . . '; 102: 'Although, as frequently noted, the leap is a decision . . . '.

<sup>3</sup> 43: 'Yet this letting go, even that is surely something; it is, after all, *meine Zuthat* [my contribution]. Does it not have to be taken into account, this diminutive moment, however brief it is – it does not have to be long, because it is a *leap*.'

person is worthy and sacred because she is the *unconditioned condition of every value's validity*.

#### **The solution of Joas' why-problem**

As has been said before, Kierkegaard's phenomenology of *how* to affirm a historical value can help us to understand *why* we should or – even stronger – why we *ought* to affirm both human dignity and the related human rights practice. Human dignity or the sacredness of the person is not one ethical value among others. It is the unconditioned condition of every value's validity. Hence, in affirming the ethical value of the sacredness of the person we likewise affirm the *human faculty to affirm values at all*. As long as we believe something to be valuable (and, as practical beings we cannot cease to believe this) we are committed to affirm the dignity of the person. Hence the concluding answer to the question why we ought to affirm the sacredness of the person is that this value is not a historical value but the necessary condition of all historical value affirmation. If, moreover, the human rights practice is the practice intended to protect this value, we are also committed to affirm this practice.

#### **Possible objections**

So far it has been shown that any attempt to apply Joas' affirmative genealogy necessarily entails an unconditioned decision by which the value in question is affirmed. And it is the faculty to take such a decision that accounts for human dignity. The appropriate method of justifying this value, therefore, is not the affirmative act in itself but the uncovering of its unconditioned condition. Yet, from Joas' point of view at least two objections can be made against this solution of his why-problem.

First, at several places Joas asserts that the type of argument being employed here suffers from a serious problem: it applies only to human persons who have the mental or cognitive skills to make existential decisions, but it excludes a great number of human beings as, for instance, babies, severely mentally disabled, or comatose. This objection can be called the *objection from exclusion*.

A second challenge is related to the concept of values Joas has been putting forward in several publications. In his view, the encounter with values is an overwhelming experience of subjective evidence, for which reason the experience itself cannot be subjected to the influence of the will. 'When we experience a value', Joas says, 'we experience it as valid in itself. And when we experience it as valid in itself we are committed to its recognition' (Joas 2011: 192). A value is thus affectively intense and in that respect much closer to the person than a cognitive truth which might be perceived as indifferent and distant fact. Therefore, Joas could say that it makes no sense to presuppose an additional decision by which the value is affirmed; the experience of a value alone involves an affirmative attitude towards it. We might call this difficulty the *objection from experience*.

Though each of these challenges makes a good point, one can still doubt whether they are cogent. The *objection from exclusion*, for instance, does not prove what it intends to. Of course, initially it is the other person's ability to make existential decisions that compels us to recognize her dignity. But this by no means entails that the possession of such an ability is a *necessary condition*. There may be other reasons (and in fact there are) to attribute dignity to human beings and, in doing this, to expand the group of persons who are protected by the human rights practice.

The *objection from experience* said that values can be so appealing that their affirmation does not necessarily involve an intentional decision. But can values be that strong? To answer this question, another look at Kierkegaard may help. In *The Sickness unto Death*, he sketches the scenario of a person who is offered eternal friendship with God. This person, Kierkegaard says, 'exists before God, may speak with God any time he wants to, assured of being heard by him – in short, this person is invited to live on the most intimate terms with God! Furthermore, for this person's sake . . . God comes to the world, allows himself to be born, to suffer, to die, and this suffering God – he almost implores and beseeches to accept the help that is offered to him!' (Kierkegaard 1980: 85). On Kierkegaard's view, this person experiences the most appealing value ever. And yet, she still is free to reject the offer. Kierkegaard's famous definition of sin virtually emphasizes this possibility. 'Sin', he says, 'is – after being taught by a revelation from God what sin is – before God in despair not to will to be oneself or in despair to will to be oneself ' (*ibid*.: 96). The possibility of sin entails the possibility of rejecting what one has experienced as the ultimate and most appealing value. Consequently, the affirmation of this value implies a free decision and cannot exclusively be explained by the value's attractiveness. Hence, the objection from experience also doesn't work.

#### **Conclusion**

Summing up, we can conclude that Joas is absolutely right when he states that the human rights practice must be based on motivational value experiences. Otherwise, it is doomed to disappear. Accordingly, an affirmative genealogy can make a worthwhile and presumably even indispensable contribution to the establishment, the continuation, and the expansion of the human rights practice. However, we still have to recognize that an affirmative genealogy neither can *justify the moral necessity* of the human rights practice nor can it *enforce the affirmation* of human dignity as the underlying value. Just as God in Kierkegaard's latter example, the affirmative genealogist can only implore, beg, entreat and beseech her addressees to appropriate this value by a free decision. By no means can she substitute this decision or make it redundant. Affirmative genealogy, therefore, is a sort of a 'summons' (*Aufforderung*), as Fichte once called it: an urgent appeal to leap into the recognition of the other's sacredness and dignity.

#### **References**

- Joas, H. 2011. *Die Sakralit¨at der Person: Eine neue Genealogie der Menschenrechte*. Berlin: Suhrkamp
- Kierkegaard, S. 1962. *Die Tageb¨ucher*, trans. E. Hirsch, vol. 1. Dusseldorf, Cologne: ¨ Diederichs
	- 1980. *The Sickness unto Death: A Christian Psychological Exposition for Upbuilding and Awakening*, trans. H. V. Hong and E. H. Hong, in *Kierkegaard's Writings*, vol. XIX. Princeton University Press
	- 1985., *Philosophical Fragments*, trans. H. V. Hong and E. H. Hong, in *Kierkegaard's Writings*, vol. VII. Princeton University Press
	- 1987. *Either/Or: Part II*, trans. H. V. Hong and E. H. Hong, in *Kierkegaard's Writings*, vol. IV. Princeton University Press
	- 1992. *Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments*, vol. 1, trans. H. V. Hong and E. H. Hong, in *Kierkegaard's Writings*, vol. XII.1. Princeton University Press