

---

### Kantian perspectives on the rational basis of human dignity

THOMAS E. HILL, JR

Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) made the dignity of humanity central in his moral philosophy, and his idea has been interpreted and extended in many ways. Here, I sketch a broadly Kantian understanding of his position, noting occasionally alternative interpretations. The main questions are these: (1) What is human dignity? (2) By virtue of what do human beings have dignity? (3) Why believe in human dignity? (4) What are the practical implications?

Kant's main themes were these (Kant 2002: 214–45):1 all persons, regardless of rank or social class, have an equal intrinsic worth or dignity. Human dignity is an innate worth or status that we did not earn and cannot forfeit. Rather, we must strive to make our individual choices worthy of this moral standing, which elevates us above animals and mere things. A fundamental principle of reason and morality, the Categorical Imperative, tells us to treat humanity in each person never merely as a means, but always as an end in itself. We must act as if we were both law-makers and subjects in an ideal moral commonwealth in which the members, as ends in themselves, have *dignity* rather than mere *price*. In contrast to market price and other values that are dependent on our personal attachments, Kant calls dignity 'an unconditional and incomparable worth' that 'admits of no equivalent'. Human dignity is based on the prior thesis that 'the moral law', an unconditional command of reason, has an absolute dignity and authority that everyone must respect. This moral law requires respect for human dignity because all human persons, good or bad, must, from the standpoint of practice, be presumed to have the capacities and predispositions of rational autonomy. In treating humanity as an end in itself and following the moral principles of an ideal moral commonwealth, we will be giving appropriate recognition to the autonomy of each person and shaping our lives by general policies that we can rationally regard as permissible for anyone to follow. The fundamental moral law that affirms human dignity has practical implications for both law and individual ethical choices. Legal institutions must interpret, apply and coercively enforce the innate right to freedom of every person, and

<sup>1</sup> [6: 412–245]. All bracketed numbers refer to Kant 1903/11, except where otherwise stated.

individuals must respect themselves and others as persons with equal standing under the moral law.

#### **What is human dignity?**

As scholars have noted, there is a long history of the general concept of dignity understood as a distinguished social standing that is elevated above others (Hruska 2006; Sensen 2009). Some have dignity associated with their office, for example, as judges, senators, bishops or queens. Ordinary people are supposed to show special respect for these 'dignitaries', in various appropriate ways, in honour of their elevated standing, and the office holders are expected to behave in a manner worthy of their position. Aristocracies and caste systems divide human beings into hereditary classes that require special honours for members of the higher classes whether or not the higher ranked individuals have the responsibilities of public office. The ancient Romans considered Roman citizenship as a status worthy of honour and gradually extended citizenship widely even to former 'barbarians' for service in their armies. Rousseau gave modern expression to the equal dignity of all citizens of an ideal republic, and Kant, drawing also from Christianity and Stoicism, extended Rousseau's political ideal into a moral ideal of all of humanity united by common principles. As members of a universal moral commonwealth, even ordinary human beings have a dignity independent of office, social class and political citizenship.

Although we may speak of dignity as a 'worth' or 'value' that humanity and individual persons have, it is important to resist the contemporary assumption that all values are weights on a scale whereby we can determine what 'on balance' we should do. In contrast to values based solely on what is useful or desired, to have dignity is to have an 'unconditional' status of worth or value. This implies that dignity is independent not only of office, social class and citizenship, but also of ethnic heritage, religious affiliation, gender, race, sexual orientation and any other factor except the basic human capacities and dispositions necessary to being a rational and autonomous person. Kant shared some common prejudices of his time about the capacities of women and non-European 'races', but his mature works repeatedly affirm the equal dignity of any person with the essential capacities to be a moral agent. By doing wrong we do not forfeit our fundamental status as human beings, even though by criminal acts we may forfeit various civil rights. Even those who make the 'evil' life-governing choice to subordinate the moral law to self-interest (Kant 1998: 55–61) 2 must be respected as human beings assuming that, despite their bad choices, they have the basic rationality and freedom necessary for being moral agents. No one with these basic capacities can altogether escape rational and felt recognition of the authority of the moral law and consciousness of his or her capacity to choose to conform, for the basis of this recognized authority is not tradition, self-interest, human sentiments, external powers or Platonic forms, but the common practical reason of each person exercised from a standpoint of autonomy.

Kantian dignity is not only 'unconditional' but 'incomparable' and 'without equivalent.' (Kant 1996: 187, 209; 2002: 235–6) 3 This contrasts sharply with Hobbes' definition: 'The value, or WORTH of a man is, as of all other things, his price: that is to say, so much as would be given for his power.'4 According to Kant, dignity is 'above all price': it is not to be sacrificed for things the value of which depends solely on utility and personal preferences. What has dignity is also, in a sense, inviolable and irreplaceable. We cannot decide what we should do by assigning a 'dignity-value', even an equal dignity-value, to each human being and then calculating – two are worth more than one, three more than two, and so on (cf. Cummiskey 1996: 110–22). If, tragically, we must choose to let some die to save others, this calls for justification by principles that appropriately respect each person, which cannot be *simply* a matter of calculating the numbers. Each life matters, but respect for human dignity is not just about preserving lives.

The Kantian thesis that the moral law and humanity have an unconditional and incomparable value does not mean that judgments of moral right and wrong are ultimately based on a prior intuition of a value that is independent of the moral law. In an important sense, for Kant the right is always prior to the good. To attribute dignity to the moral law and therefore to humanity is to express in a concise and forceful way that we must appropriately respect and honour both in our attitudes, choices and conduct. What we must do to comply, more specifically, must be determined by the content of the moral law as expressed in the Categorical Imperative, and Kant defends this, not by appeal to a prior independent value, but by complex arguments about the presuppositions of rational moral judgments.

#### **By virtue of what is dignity attributed to human beings?**

The basic Kantian answer is that human beings have dignity by virtue of their rationality and freedom, but this has been interpreted in different ways, for example, as the capacity to set ends, as pragmatic and technical predispositions, as a good will, and as all rational capacities (for example, Korsgaard 1996: 106–32; Hill 2002: 39–41; Dean 2006; Wood 2008: 85–105). Arguably, the most plausible interpretation takes the key feature to be 'humanity' – when understood as our nature as rational beings with autonomy of the will.5 The core of this complex Kantian idea is that persons have the capacity and disposition to recognize as authoritative and to follow both principles of instrumental

- 4 Hobbes 1994: Part I, Chapter 10, para. 16.
- 5 This includes what Kant calls 'personality'.

<sup>3</sup> 1996: [6: 436]; [6: 462]; 2002: [4: 434–6].

rationality (hypothetical imperatives) and principles of rational morality (categorical imperatives). Autonomy of the will is not the existentialist's freedom from rational constraints or a rational egoist's freedom to do whatever most effectively advances his or her interests. Autonomy is also not any particular right, for example, a right to have one's informed consent be respected in medicine, though it underlies arguments for such specific rights. Kantian rational autonomy, rather, is the general capacity and disposition to govern oneself by rational and reasonable principles that are justifiable to all insofar as they take up a common point of view in which everyone counts as an equal co-legislator of specific moral principles.

In more ordinary terms, this means that, at least as competent adults, human beings implicitly understand themselves to be bound not merely by concerns of prudence and efficiency, but also by potentially overriding constraints entailed by recognizing others as moral equals. Although they may come from different cultures and disagree about specific issues, they are presumed to be aware of the most basic requirements of morality and to think and feel that they should live accordingly even if they often fail to do so. They cannot persistently and consistently dismiss 'the moral law within' as merely an external demand or simply the product of cultural conditioning.

The Kantian thesis that human beings have dignity by virtue of their rationality and autonomy has been repeatedly challenged on the ground that it devalues animals, children and mentally incompetent human adults, making them subject to treatment merely as means. Controversy continues, but at least we should note that the thesis that ordinary competent adult moral agents have dignity by virtue of their rational autonomy does not imply that *only* they have moral value or standing. Moral principles are constraints and guides that ordinary competent agents *would* follow *if* they were fully rational and autonomous. The question is how such principles direct morally competent agents – those with the active capacities and dispositions of rational autonomy – to treat young children whose moral capacities remain latent, demented adults who have lost them, and animals that lack them. Arguably, these moral principles would require us to extend a kind of dignity to human beings who have lost or not yet developed moral capacities and also (despite what Kant says) to regard animals as more than mere means to our ends.

#### **Why believe in human dignity?**

The Kantian attributes dignity to persons by virtue of their having rational autonomy, but, focusing now just on competent adults, why believe (a) that rational autonomy confers dignity and (b) that human beings have rational autonomy? For Kantians, these are questions for practical, not theoretical, reason. That is, they call for vindication from the standpoint of deliberation and choice, not scientific or metaphysical proofs. Practical reason, however, cannot rest content with appeals to self-interest, sentiments, tradition, alleged intuition, theology, tradition or merely pragmatic considerations (Kant 2002: 240–5).6

First, why accept that rational autonomy entitles one to the elevated status of dignity? Kant's texts defy brief summary, but a main line of argument attempts to show that our common idea that we are bound by moral duty presupposes that there is a categorically rational imperative, expressible in several (supposedly) equivalent forms that tell us to act only on universalizable maxims, to treat humanity in each person as an end in itself, and to act as if each person is a rational autonomous legislator of moral laws (*ibid*.: 214–40).7 Together these entail that we must act as if we are authors and subjects of laws in a commonwealth ('kingdom') of ends, in which we treat each other with the restraint and regard encapsulated in the idea of dignity. The conclusion here is conditional: if we believe in moral duty and rational autonomy (its basis), then we must believe in human dignity (*ibid*.: 245).8

Setting aside specifics, the point is that to accept that we are under *moral* constraints is to understand that we must restrict our choices by basic principles that are permissible for anyone to follow, that attribute to every person an equal and respect-worthy status, and that would be accepted by all reasonable persons as justifiable from this common standpoint. So those who accept that they are under moral constraints thereby accept that they must treat all persons with the restraint and concern (dignity) accorded them under such principles.

The second question remains – why attribute rational autonomy to (at least competent adult) human beings? What is at issue is not whether human beings have the capacity for instrumental rationality but whether we must accept that we are all under the implicitly acknowledged rational authority of principles that we would accept from a common mutually respectful standpoint. The Kantian answer cannot appeal to self-interest, moral sentiment, divine command or metaphysical intuition. Our attribution of rational autonomy to human beings implies that it is *rational* for us to accept and follow principles from a common moral standpoint, and this rationality claim is neither an empirical claim nor self-contradictory to deny.

Nevertheless, Kant presents considerations to heighten our awareness that in our thinking and practice we are in fact deeply, and unavoidably, committed to fundamental moral principles as rational constraints on our attitudes and choices. For example, one argument challenges us to acknowledge that we cannot help but regard *ourselves* as more than a mere means for the use of others, and that we regard ourselves in this way for the same reason that everyone else does – namely, we take ourselves to be free and rational persons (*ibid*.: 229).9 He argues further that insofar as we are rational human beings we cannot act or even engage in theoretical investigations without taking ourselves to be 'free' as persons operating under rational standards, such as the moral law, that are not merely instrumental. Later, Kant proposes that we are conscious of moral duty,

6 [4: 440–4]. 7 [4: 412–40]. 8 [4: 444–5]. 9 [4: 229]. which presupposes rational autonomy, as 'a fact of reason', evident in examples such as whether to bear false witness leading to the execution of an innocent person (Kant 1997: 27–8, 41).10

In effect, Kant calls for honest reflection on our deepest moral commitments and their implications. His arguments ask us to reflect on how we conceive of ourselves as moral agents, and then to act consistently on the practical implications. He offers no theoretical proof either that rational autonomy confers dignity or that human beings have rational autonomy. Instead, the Kantian response to 'Why believe?' is 'Examine yourself clearly and honestly – do you not already (inevitably) believe?' In other words, 'can you not recognize that these moral ideas are deeply imbedded in your own practical thinking and that you cannot consistently dismiss them as irrational prejudices, false empirical hypotheses, or mere empty metaphysical speculations?' This mode of argument will not satisfy everyone, and some Kantians attempt to offer strengthened versions.

#### **What are the practical implications?**

Kant's earlier ethical works are focused on the *duties* of individuals, but they also provide background to his later theory of *rights* (1996: 1–138).11 For both rights and duties, Kant's ultimate standard is ('pure') practical reason. The context of questions about rights, state authority and justice is a world of embodied agents in a limited world-space who cannot help but limit each other's ('external') freedom. The questions are not about morally worthy acts and motives but rather about when a person may rightfully interfere with another, what counterforce is permissible, and why a legitimate state with coercive power is needed. The starting-point regarding these issues is the universal principle of justice: 'Any action is right if it can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the freedom of choice of each can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law' (*ibid*.: 24).12 This expresses the core of an innate right of freedom and equality attributed to everyone as a basis for and limit on state authority. Institutions as well as individuals must avoid treating persons simply as means, even to socially desirable ends.

From these fundamental ideas and general facts about the human condition Kant attempts to derive more specific rights – *juridical rights* to be instituted and enforced within states, standards of *international right* to be affirmed through a federation of states, and *cosmopolitan rights* of individuals independent of national borders. From a Kantian standpoint, specific human rights, such as those in the United Nations' charter, are not self-standing but must be justified by broader principles that appropriately respect human dignity. Like others who object to free-floating rights-claims that lack institutional enforcement,

10 [5: 30–1, 47]. 11 [6: 203–372]. 12 [6: 231].

Kantians generally agree that theoretically backed ought-to-be rights can only be fully determinate, binding and effective when they are defined and enforced through political states or international institutions. Some, however, extend Kant's ideas to advocate a broader understanding of cosmopolitan rights, global duties, and promoting justice through institutions other than nation-states (O'Neill 2000: 115–202).

The idea of human dignity is also a basic standard for personal relations. Kant expresses the first principle of a system of 'ethical' principles for individuals as follows: '[A]ct in accordance with a maxim of *ends* that it can be a universal law for everyone to have. In accordance with this principle a human being is an end for himself as well as for others, and it is not enough that he is not authorized to use either himself or others merely as means (since he could still be indifferent to them); it is in itself his duty to make man as such his end' (Kant 1996: 157).13 Here, the idea of humanity as an end is affirmed as a standard for the basic attitudes, aims and choices that we adopt as individuals. Kant repeatedly appeals to the dignity of humanity – or the ideal rational person within each of us – in support of his ethical principles, especially the duty to preserve and improve oneself as a rational being and the duty to respect other persons (*ibid*.: 176–97, 209–13).14

#### **References**

Cummiskey, D. 1996. *Kantian Consequentialism*. Oxford University Press Dean, R. 2006. *The Value of Humanity in Kant's Moral Theory*. Oxford: Clarendon Press Hill, T. 2002. *Human Welfare and Moral Worth*. Oxford University Press Hobbes, T. 1994. *Leviathan*, ed. E. Curley. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Co. Hruska, J. 2006. 'Kant and Human Dignity', in *Kant and Law*, ed. B. S. Byrd and J. Hruska. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Kant, I. 1903/11. *Kants gesammelte Schriften*, herausgegeben von der Konigliche Preussis- ¨ che Akademie der Wissenschaften. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter 1996. *The Metaphysics of Morals*, ed. M. Gregor. Cambridge University Press 1997. *Critique of Practical Reason*, ed. M. Gregor. Cambridge University Press 1998. *Religion within the Boundaries of Mere Reason*, ed. A. Wood and G. di Giovani. Cambridge University Press 2002. *Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals*, ed. T. E. Hill, Jr and A. Zweig. Oxford University Press Korsgaard, C. 1996. *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*. Cambridge University Press O'Neill, O. 2000. *Bounds of Justice*. Cambridge University Press Sensen, O. 2009. 'Kant's Conception of Human Dignity', *Kant-Studien* 100, 309–31 Wood, A. 2008. *Kantian Ethics*. Cambridge University Press

- 13 [6: 395]. *Being an end in itself* is at least a central aspect of *dignity*, though some think that for Kant they are not identical. See Wood 2008: 86–8.
- 14 [6: 421–47, 462–8].