

---

### Human dignity and human rights in Alan Gewirth's moral philosophy

DERYCK BEYLEVELD

The Preamble to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966 (ICCPR) states that the rights proclaimed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 (UDHR), some of which the ICCPR aims to give effect to, 'derive from the inherent dignity of the human person'. It is because human persons have dignity that they have human rights. The Preamble to the UDHR further states that human rights are 'inalienable rights of all members of the human family', possessed equally by all members of this family, all of whom have 'inherent dignity'.

Alan Gewirth argues that agents (those with the capacity and disposition to pursue purposes voluntarily) must, on pain of contradicting that they are agents, accept and comply with the 'Principle of Generic Consistency' (PGC), which requires them to respect the 'generic rights'1 of all agents (Gewirth 1978: 53–8). Consequently, the PGC is a principle with which all rational action must comply. In Gewirth's terminology, the PGC is 'dialectically necessary', which is to say that the requirement for an agent to assent to it follows purely logically from a premise that no agent can coherently deny, namely, the claim of the agent that he, she or it2 is an agent.

Assuming that the argument is sound, does it justify the rights recognized by the UDHR? More specifically, does it justify: (1) the claim that all members of the human family equally have (or must be accorded) inherent dignity, in consequence of which they all equally have (or must be accorded) inalienable rights; (2) the specific rights granted by the UDHR?

- 1 These are rights to 'generic conditions of agency', which are conditions/capacities that must be satisfied if an agent is to be able to act at all or with general chances of success, regardless of the purposes being pursued. The generic conditions are made up of 'basic needs' (lack of which impacts on the capacity to act at all), such as life, mental equilibrium, health, food, shelter and freedom from coercion; 'non-subtractive needs' (required to maintain one's ability to achieve one's purposes), such as accurate information; and 'additive needs' (required to improve one's abilities to achieve one's purposes), such as 'higher education'.
2 I will refer to 'it', unless referring directly to male or female agents, as agents are neither necessarily biologically human nor gendered.

The argument provides answers to three fundamental questions of moral philosophy: (a) the distributive question, 'Who has moral rights?'; (b) the substantive question, 'What is the content of (these) rights?'; and (c) the authoritative question, 'Why must (these) rights be granted?' (see Gewirth 1978: 3).3 The direct answer to (a) is 'All agents', to (b) 'The generic conditions of agency', and to (c) 'Because it is dialectically necessary for agents to do so'.

After outlining the argument for the PGC, I will elucidate the formal nature of the generic rights it secures and the conception of dignity as the ground of these rights that it implies. I will then consider whether this conception of dignity can be seen as the ground of human rights *per the UDHR*. I present my personal views concerning what the argument for the PGC logically entails, which differ in some important ways from Gewirth's own opinions. Consideration of the extent to which the specific rights recognized by the UDHR may be viewed as rights to generic conditions of agency is beyond the scope of this chapter.

#### **The argument, the generic rights, and dignity**

#### The argument in outline

The argument has three stages.4 According to Stage One, I (who might be any agent) must (on pain of contradicting that I am an agent) accept that I ought (*instrumentally* for the sake of *my* purposes, *whatever these might be*) to pursue and defend my possession of the generic conditions of agency, because they are needed for me to pursue/achieve any purposes by my own actions. According to Stage Two, I similarly must (i.e. must, on pain of contradicting that I am an agent) consider that I have both positive and negative rights to the generic conditions of agency. This is because the proposition that I have these rights is logically entailed by the proposition that I categorically (i.e. simply by virtue of being an agent, regardless of my purposes) instrumentally ought to pursue and defend my having the generic conditions. According to Stage Three, it follows purely logically5 that I similarly not merely *must consider that I have* the generic rights (from which it follows purely logically that each other agent must consider that it has the generic rights on pain of contradicting that it is an agent), but that I similarly *must consider that it is simply because I am an agent that I have the generic rights*. From this it follows purely logically that I similarly must consider that all agents have the generic rights; and, from this, it follows logically that every agent must (on pain of contradicting that it is an agent)

3 Note that Gewirth poses the substantive question and the distributive question in terms of interests rather than rights.

- 4 This construction is spelled out fully and defended systematically in Beyleveld 1991. It received Gewirth's endorsement (Beyleveld 1991: XIV; Gewirth 1996: XI).
- 5 This is by the 'Argument from the Sufficiency of Agency' (Gewirth 1978: 110). See also Beyleveld 1991, especially Chapter 8 and 377–82; and Beyleveld and Bos 2009: 7–16.

consider that all agents have the generic rights. The PGC, 'Act in accord with the generic rights of all agents', in being dialectically necessary, is categorically binding on all agents.

#### The formal nature of the generic rights

The argument entails that:

- (1) The generic rights are positive, as well as negative, rights not only to non-interference with possession of the generic conditions, but also to assistance in securing them when the needy agent cannot secure them by its own efforts. This is because agents need assistance as much as noninterference when they cannot secure the generic conditions by their own efforts.
- (2) The generic rights are rights under the 'will' or 'choice' conception of rights: i.e. agents may waive the benefits of their generic rights by releasing other agents from their correlative duties. This is because the value they must attach to their possession of the generic conditions is not intrinsic but instrumental (albeit categorically so). My negative generic rights are inalienable, but are rights not to be interfered with *against my will*, while my equally inalienable positive generic rights are rights to be assisted *if I so wish*. This, as I explain further below, entails that agents cannot have perfect duties *to themselves* to protect and pursue their possession of the generic conditions.
- (3) For it to be mandatory for an agent A to be granted the generic rights, it is *sufficient* that A have the essential properties attributed to agents in the argument. These properties are:
	- (i) An ability and disposition to pursue purposes voluntarily. The first step in Stage One involves inferring from my claim to be an agent (by definition, the claim that I do something X voluntarily in order to achieve some purpose E) that I necessarily attach a value to E sufficient to motivate me to take steps to achieve E. This presupposes that agents at least *feel* that *they* choose their purposes, whether or not they actually have freewill (in being first-causes of their purposes). This, in turn, supposes that they have a sense of self-identity, which requires them to possess a concept of the future and an ability to appreciate minimal logical rules.
	- (ii) Perception of the need to do something in order to achieve one's purposes and that pursuit/achievement of one's purposes can be frustrated by the absence of necessary conditions. This presupposes the ability to reason instrumentally (Beyleveld and Bos 2009).
- (4) Because only agents with these essential properties can waive the benefits of the generic rights, only they can be held to possess the generic rights. Thus, being such an agent is not only the sufficient, but also the *necessary* ground for mandatory attribution of the generic rights.

#### Dignity as the ground of the generic rights

If possession of dignity is the reason why a being has (or, strictly, must be accorded) rights, then it is possession of the essential properties of agency attributed in the argument that constitutes possession of such dignity in relation to the generic rights. Human *agents* possess these essential properties. Since it is by virtue of possession of these properties that beings are inherently subject to hopes and fears related to their existence, well-being and projects, dignity as the ground of agents' rights may be said to inhere in agents' capacity to hope and fear. This capacity is rooted in the phenomenology of human agency, which is characterized, on the one hand, by a sense (deriving from an inability to infallibly predict what will be presented to one's senses) that one inhabits a material world operating under mindless laws of cause and effect (or failing that, chance). This sense posits the possibility that human agents *might* themselves be wholly part of such a world, and hence have no ultimate value. On the other hand, human agents inherently have a sense of being the first causes of their own actions, which suggests the idea that they *might* not be wholly part of a material world existing independently of their senses, and have an inherently meaningful existence. I have argued, elsewhere (Beyleveld 2009) that both belief in freewill (suggested by the phenomenology of agency) and belief in determinism (suggested by the phenomenology of sense-experience) are antithetical to morality conceived of as a categorical imperative, and that morality so conceived is only intelligible in application to beings with the capacity to hope for freewill and transcendence of a wholly material world coupled with the fear that everything is wholly material and ultimately meaningless.

Because the argument grounds the generic rights under the will-conception, it entails a conception of dignity as the ground of rights that empowers agents to act in accordance with their own will against the will of others subject only to their actions not violating the more important rights of others. This idea of 'dignity as empowerment' is in accord with Kant's (Kant 1998: 4:429) prescription that every agent must always be treated 'as an end, never merely as a means', *provided that* it is understood that agents are not merely empowered to resist interference with their generic interests by others but also to act and to permit action against their own generic interests.

#### **The generic rights, human rights and human dignity**

Not all human beings − *if being human is defined biologically* − for example the unborn, very young children, adults with extremely severe mental disabilities, and those with very severe brain damage or in a permanent vegetative state, display the capacities of agents. Therefore, unless to be human is to be an agent *by definition*, showing that all agents must be granted the generic rights, does not show that all human beings must be granted the generic rights. Without more, the foundational argument for the PGC does not provide a foundational argument for human rights *per* the UDHR.

However, Gewirth claims that the generic rights are possessed by potential agents and beings with some but not all of the capacities of agency (whether or not they are biologically human), in proportion to the degree to which they approach being agents (Gewirth 1978: 140–5). He claims that this follows by the 'Principle of Proportionality' (PP): 'When some quality Q justifies having certain rights R, and the possession of Q varies in degree in the respect that is relevant to Q's justifying the having of R, the degree to which R is had is proportional to or varies with the degree to which Q is had.'

But, as Gewirth himself emphasizes, 'in relation to the claim to have the generic rights, actually being a prospective agent who has purposes he wants to fulfil is an absolute quality, not varying in degree' (Gewirth 1978: 123).

It therefore follows, as Hill claims (Hill 1981: 186), that the PP merely entails that non-agents approach having the generic rights in proportion to how closely they approach possession of agency, not as Gewirth claims that they possess the generic rights to the degree that they approach being agents (and specifically that they have those rights to things that they can possess and do without endangering their own and others' purpose-fulfilment) (Gewirth 1978: 123 and 141–2). Similarly, potential agents only potentially have generic rights.

Considering such objections, Gewirth claims that possession of agency is only necessary for having the generic rights *in full* (1978: 141; 1981: 225–7). But this does not answer the objection that the PP requires Q to be capable of varying in degree, when possession of agency is an all-or-nothing condition, so the PP cannot secure generic rights to a degree for non-agents on the basis of possession of a degree of agency.

Gewirth seems to be thinking in the following way. The generic rights correspond to generic interests (conditions) of agency. Some non-agents have generic *life or behavioural* interests in things that are generic conditions *of agency* for agents. Suppose that agent A claims 'I have a right to X, Y and Z because X, Y and Z are generic conditions of my agency'. Suppose, also, that non-agent B has life-interests in Y and Z though not in X, because X is a generically necessary condition for action but not for life and B lacks the capacity to act. According to Gewirth, A must grant B the generic rights to Y and Z, though not to X.6

The problem is that to characterize B's interests in Y and Z as generic rights of the kind secured by the argument to the PGC is a category mistake. The generic rights are, as justified, rights for certain interests not to be interfered with or to be assisted with *according to the will of an agent*. Some of these rights do correspond *in content* to interests that can be had by non-agents, but *in form* they are *essentially* the interests of agents. As such, they are only capable of being possessed by agents. Consequently, Hill's claim that Gewirth is guilty of 'the fallacy of disparateness' must be upheld (Hill 1981: 190). Gewirth's reasoning

<sup>6</sup> This is very much the way Gewirth presents the matter in the unpublished, unfinished manuscript on *Human Rights and Global Justice* he left at his death, which is stored in the Archives of the Regenstein Library, University of Chicago.

can only be sound if agents are required to value their lives and some other generic conditions of their agency intrinsically and not merely as categorically instrumentally necessary conditions of agency, when the argument for the PGC provides no basis for such a requirement.7

Alongside this, it is significant that Gewirth contends, despite himself recognizing the waivability in principle of the benefits of the generic rights *by agents*, that agents can have perfect duties to themselves to protect their generic interests. He presents the objection to perfect duties to oneself succinctly:

[I]f a person has duties to himself, then, because of the correlativity of duties and rights, he also has rights against himself. But any right-holder can always give up his right and thereby release the respondent of the right from his duty. On the other hand, no person can release himself from a duty. Hence the notion of duties to oneself is contradictory, since it implies that a person both can and cannot release himself from his duties to himself. (Gewirth 1978: 334)

Nevertheless, he considers that the objection is not fatal to the idea of perfect duties to oneself. He claims that (i) agents have perfect duties to obey the PGC that they cannot waive; and (ii) it is possible to distinguish *within oneself* between the rights-holder and the duty-holder by viewing (a) my present self as owing duties to my future selves; or (b) my 'lower self' as owing duties to my higher self; or (c) my freedom or well-being as having rights not to be overpowered by the other (Gewirth 1978: 335–8).

But, re (i), an agent's duty to obey the PGC, which *is* unwaivable, is not a moral duty, but a purely rational requirement not to incur self-contradiction, while moral rights and duties are duties *under* the PGC. Re (ii:a), the fact that my future selves develop from and are extensions of my present self means that my present selves cannot hold my past selves to account for wrongs done to them. (ii:b) is untenable because it does not model the problem unless my higher selves can waive their rights against my lower selves, in which case the problem recurs. As regards (ii:c), this implies that I have an intrinsic duty to integrate various aspects of my psyche as an agent, which implies that I have an intrinsic duty to be an agent, for which the argument for the PGC provides no justification. Furthermore, it is wholly untenable to regard aspects of my agency as agents without altering the definition of an agent.8

However, it does not follow that agents do not owe duties under the PGC not to harm or to protect the life or behavioural interests of apparent non-agents. This is extremely important, because, for the PGC to justify *human* rights *per* the UDHR, it is not necessary for these rights to be viewed as the generic rights *of agents under the will conception of rights*. It is only necessary for the PGC to generate perfect duties not to interfere with or protect inherent interests

<sup>7</sup> For a detailed critique of Gewirth's use of the PP, see Beyleveld and Pattinson 2000.

<sup>8</sup> See further Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001: 105–10, which also examines Kant's similar attempts to rescue the idea of perfect duties to oneself.

of all 'members of the human family' equally, some of which duties might be correlative to rights under the interest conception of rights.

There is a relatively uncontroversial way in which the PGC can generate duties of non-interference/protection *in relation to* apparent non-agents (whether human or not). For example, agent A can have a duty not to kill apparent non-agent B because B (say, a dog) is the property of agent C; or because B (say, an unborn child) is very important to its agent parents; or if torturing apparent non-agents 'brutalizes' agents and makes them less sensitive to the suffering of agents. However, any such duties are vicarious. They are not owed to the apparent non-agent because of inherent properties of the apparent nonagent alone, but because of the contingent relationship between the apparent non-agent and an agent or agents. The duties are owed directly to the agents concerned, being protective of their generic rights, not to the apparent nonagent, and they depend on contingent relationships between the agent and the apparent non-agent. Consequently, such arguments cannot be used to establish that agents owe duties to human apparent non-agents solely because of the inherent qualities of the latter, correlative to which it may be said that human apparent non-agents have inherent rights (under an interest conception of rights) to interests they inherently have as members of the human family.

But, for this, another argument is available.9 Its starting premise is that only agents can be certain that they are agents. This is because the essential properties of agents include what are intrinsically mental properties. I know for certain that I am an agent. I do not know for certain that other beings that behave like agents (i.e. apparent agents) are agents. This suggests that I might, *in practice*, legitimately reject the idea that I am categorically bound to comply with the PGC. For, while I must grant all other agents the generic rights, may I not hold that I am not categorically bound to treat any being other than myself as an agent? The answer is 'No!' This is because the fact that I cannot prove that there are any agents other than myself does not show that I am not required to treat apparent agents as agents. In fact, if I assume that apparent agent B is not an agent, and act accordingly, but I am (unknowably) wrong, then I violate the PGC, whereas if I assume that B is an agent, and act accordingly, but I am (unknowably) wrong, then I do not thereby violate the PGC. Hence I must treat all apparent agents as agents.10

Now, just as I cannot know for certain that apparent agents are agents, I cannot know for certain that apparent non-agents are not agents. It is possible that apparent non-agents (whether biologically human or not) are in fact agents.

<sup>9</sup> This argument was originally presented in Beyleveld and Pattinson 2000. For further clarification in response to criticisms from Holm and Coggon 2009, see Beyleveld and Pattinson 2010.

<sup>10</sup> It should be noted that, in order to behave like an agent, a being does not have to be living in the biological sense. Androids with the sophistication of those in films like *Blade Runner*, or *I Robot*, are cases in point.

If I assume that an apparent non-agent is not an agent, act accordingly, but I am wrong, then again I violate the PGC. On the other hand, if I make the opposite assumption, act accordingly, but I am wrong, then I do not thereby violate the PGC. From this, I have argued that while apparent non-agents cannot be granted any generic rights because these are rights under the will-conception, the PGC renders it necessary to recognize duties to apparent non-agents in proportion to how closely they approach being apparent agents, the degree of approach being measured essentially by the life and behavioural interests they have in content that correspond to the generic interests of agents. As far as rocks and tables are concerned, no duties will be incurred simply because it is not possible to relate their existence to that of agents in a way that makes it intelligible to identify appropriate interests. But, whenever we are confronted with living organisms or those capable of behaviours that mimic mental operations, then a linkage can be made. Precisely how strong these duties are is a complex matter, which need not occupy us here.11 However, it is worth noting that the practical effect is, in principle, identical to that secured by Gewirth's unsound mode of argumentation. The proper description of the result, however, is not that apparent non-agents have a degree of generic rights, but that agents owe duties to apparent non-agents in proportion to the degree to which they approach being apparent agents.

In this way, the PGC does justify *inherent* rights of all members of the human family (biologically defined). These rights comprise two categories: (a) generic rights of human apparent agents (under the will-conception of rights); and (b) duty generating interests of human non-apparent agents (which can be seen as rights under an interest conception of rights).

Ontologically, the argument to the PGC grants dignity to agents and only to agents. But, *in application of* the PGC, the generic (will-conception) rights of (apparent) agents are to be seen as grounded in their (apparent) dignity in (apparently) being subject to hopes and fears. So, in what idea of dignity are the (interest) rights of human apparent non-agents grounded? Dignity, here, cannot consist of actual possession of the essential properties of agency that ground being subject to hopes and fears. It also cannot consist in mere possession of life and behavioural interests that correspond to the generic interests of agents. Human (interest) rights are granted because of the epistemic possibility that human apparent non-agents *might be* agents despite not appearing to be so, given the absolute requirement to act in accordance with the generic rights of agents. The importance of the interests in life and non-agency behavioural interests that correspond to agency-interests is two-fold. On the one hand, the more of these an apparent non-agent has, the closer it becomes to being an apparent agent, and the more plausible it becomes to entertain that it might, despite appearances to the contrary, in fact be an agent. On the other hand,

<sup>11</sup> For some preliminary analysis and remarks, see Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001: 122–6 and 225–58.

possession of such interests is necessary for it to be intelligible to take steps to protect what might be the rights of an agent. In*this*way, dignity as empowerment remains the ground of both will-conception and interest rights recognized in its application by the PGC, and the ground of any human rights justified by the PGC.

#### **Conclusion**

There remains a problem. This is that the UDHR not only proclaims that all members of the human family have inherent rights. It says that they are equal in the rights that they have. However, the logic of the precautionary reasoning by which the PGC generates duties to apparent non-agents implies that, all things being equal, the will rights of apparent agents take precedence over the corresponding interest rights of non-apparent agents, on the ground that an apparent agent is more probably (plausibly) an agent than a non-apparent agent. Furthermore, the entire logic of this approach rests on the idea that apparent agents can have additional interests to those of non-apparent agents, which is to say that apparent agents can have some will rights that non-apparent agents do not have even interest rights to. Can this problem be overcome?

Article 1 of the UDHR states: 'All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.' One way of tackling the problem is to read this as requiring being human to be defined as being an agent (and all human rights to be viewed as will-conception rights). However, it must be noted that the UN Declaration on the Rights of Mentally Retarded Persons 1971 holds that the subjects of the Convention have the same rights as other human beings 'to the maximum degree of feasibility', which implies that all human beings do not have equal rights. From this, it follows that either the 1971 Declaration is inconsistent with the basic Human Rights Framework, or else *all* Framework statements to the effect that all humans have equal rights must be read as saying that all humans have equal rights *to the maximum extent of feasibility*.

So read, there is no problem viewing Gewirth's argument for the PGC as justifying human rights as conceived by the Human Rights Framework.

#### **References**

Beyleveld, D. 1991. *The Dialectical Necessity of Morality*. University of Chicago Press 2009. 'Morality and the God of Reason'. Inaugural Professorial Address Utrecht University 30 March 2009. Faculty of Humanities, Utrecht University

- Beyleveld, D., and Bos, G. 2009. 'The Foundational Role of the Principle of Instrumental Reason in Gewirth's Argument for the Principle of Generic Consistency: A Response to Andrew Chitty', *King's Law Journal* 20: 1–20
- Beyleveld, D., and Brownsword, R. 2001. *Human Dignity in Bioethics and Biolaw*. Oxford University Press
- Beyleveld, D., and Pattinson, S. D. 2000. 'Precautionary Reasoning as a Link to Moral Action', in M. Boylan (ed.), *Medical Ethics*. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 39–53
	- 2010. 'Defending Moral Precaution as a Solution to the Problem of Other Minds', *Ratio Juris* 23: 258–73
- Gewirth, A. 1978. *Reason and Morality*. University of Chicago Press
	- 1981. 'Replies to My Critics', in E. Regis, Jr (ed.), *Gewirth's Ethical Rationalism*. University of Chicago Press, 225–7
	- 1996. *The Community of Rights*. University of Chicago Press
- Hill, J. F. 1981. 'Are Marginal Agents "Our Recipients"?', in E. Regis, Jr (ed.), *Gewirth's Ethical Rationalism*. University of Chicago Press, 180–91
- Holm, S., and Coggon, J. 2009. 'A Cautionary Note Against "Precautionary Reasoning" in Action Guiding Morality', *Ratio Juris* 22: 295–309
- Kant, I. 1998 [1785]. *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. M. Gregor. Cambridge University Press