

---

### Jacques Maritain's personalist conception of human dignity

PAUL VALADIER∗

If civilization is to be salvaged, the new age of civilization will have to be an age of theocentric humanism. Today, human dignity is trampled under foot far and wide. Even worse, it collapses from the inside, for guided by the pure perspective of science and technology we are at a loss when it comes to discovering the rational foundations of the dignity of the person, and to believing in these.

(Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 363) 1

This text, uneasy, written at the end of the Second World War as bolshevist totalitarianism spread over large parts of Europe, clearly marks the twofold character of Maritain's approach to dignity: rooted in a lucid and bemused view of historical actuality, it calls for philosophical, metaphysical and even theological steps towards finding an adequate response to the challenges of the present; challenges which science and technology are incapable of meeting. As such, Maritain the metaphysician (and theologian) is inseparable from Maritain the political watchdog – and even agent, since he was one of the indirect architects of the 1948 Charter of the United Nations on account of his membership of a UNESCO enquiry commission on human rights. His concern for human dignity, therefore, does not ignore the diversity of conceptions and practices made manifest to him by his experience with the preparation of the Charter. Yet, at the same time, the philosopher is convinced that, without a strong metaphysical foundation, the concept of dignity risks being effaced from the human consciousness. It is with this metaphysical and historical background in mind that Maritain's philosophy of dignity ought to be approached.

#### **Dignity and natural law**

We believe we have a good sense of what human dignity comprises, and we feel the same way about the concept of a person. It seems self-evident that there is shared and general consensus on these notions. In Maritain's eyes, however, there is no such thing. In fact, the pseudo-self-evidence of a universal agreement on the content and meaning of dignity is extremely dangerous. Contrary

- 1 Maritain 1953: 102.
<sup>∗</sup> Translated by Lin van Steenbergen and Naomi van Steenbergen in collaboration with the author.

to popular opinion, the distinction between individual and person 'is a distinction that is difficult to grasp, and that requires an exercise of metaphysical spirit which is rather uncommon in contemporary thought' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 169).2 It does therefore not suffice to declare oneself a 'personalist' in order to reach agreement on the concept of dignity, for 'there is not one doctrine of personalism, but personalist aspirations and a good dozen personalist doctrines, which at times have nothing more in common than the word "person", and of which some to a greater or lesser degree tend towards one of the opposing errors between which they situate themselves' (*ibid*.: IX, 170).3 For there are personalist philosophies which justify individual anarchism, and others which justify dictatorship or which in the name of society or community are prepared to legitimize totalitarian regimes, thus subordinating the person to the social Whole. Only, in Maritain's eyes, a personalism inspired by the thought of Thomas Aquinas is capable of steering clear of those excesses, which deplete dignity of any content actually respectful of the human person.

It is for this reason that the concept of dignity must be grounded in an appeal to the traditional expression of 'natural law'. In our day, to be sure, this expression is not much cared for, rejected even. But the concept has a very long philosophical tradition, which must be revisited in order to give it all its lustre and pertinence. In order to meet the metaphysical requirements of the idea of dignity, it must be understood that the natural law is by no means a written code, but that 'there is, in virtue of human nature even, an order or disposition that can be discovered by human reason, and according to which human will must act in order to align itself with aims that are essential and necessary for the human being'. Thus, reason can discover 'the standards of its operation', 'a watershed between what is appropriate and what is not appropriate', which one can agree either to follow or not to follow. This law is both *ideal*, since it is prescribed by the intelligible necessities of the human essence, and *ontological*, since it is engrained in the structure of human concerns. But one must not forget the historicity of such a law, at least when it comes to its progressive and slow discovery by people in history and in the diversity of cultures.

To this first *ontological element*, we must add a second *gnoseological element*, through which people discover little by little what it takes to avoid evil and to act according to the good. *Understanding through inclination*, says Maritain (adding to the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas – inspired, no doubt, by Bergson, who was an early mentor to him), and not purely rational knowledge: knowledge that is obscure, vital, non-systematic, knowledge that advances through sympathy, for the intellect 'hears and consults the kind of song that is produced in the subject by the vibrations of its inner tendencies' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 585–6). This explains why knowledge of the good thing to do and the evil to avoid (natural law) has progressed in correspondence with the maturation of the moral consciousness of the peoples, that it has fluctuated, even gone astray

2 Maritain 1946: 30. 3 *Ibid.*: 31. depending on their cultural, political, social or religious 'horizons' or 'climates'. This also explains the diversity in the content given to this same natural law by different cultures, a diversity which must evidently be appreciated in conjunction with its fundamental ontological element. Such a diversity is to be understood according to the thomist doctrine of analogy, which appeals to a diverse application of one single principle depending on time and culture. This approach anticipates the possible ways in which consciousness can develop and allows for mutual questioning between different epochs and cultures. Such a progressive understanding is the source of human rights, which are its modern expression, codified in our constitutions or in charters, modern rights, perhaps, but fruits of a process of maturation, and of the development of consciousness. But 'these dynamic formulas of moral rules' are grounded in a 'transcendent' law, the natural law, itself 'participating in the eternal Law', that is to say 'in the order of Wisdom', since such a law can be obliged only if one discerns in it the trace of divine Reason or of Wisdom. It must be acknowledged by reason, and thus by the freedom reflected in this infinitely complex reality that man and society constitute.

It is advisable, therefore, to keep these two elements of the natural law together, yet distinguish them. The ontological element grounds the dignity of every human being (to which we could add a theological argument that Maritain used to cite often, according to which every human being is made in the Creator's image, and thus participates in a truly sacred dignity), and, for this reason, dignity does not depend on any internal sensation, nor on individual psychological appreciation, nor on the verdict of society or another; it is not measured by subjectivity, nor can it be effaced; 'in reality, the privilege connected with the dignity of the person is inalienable, and human life involves a sacred right. Whether to rid society of a useless member or for*raison d'´etat*, it is a crime to kill an innocent man' (*ibid*.: IX, 212).4 The two elements, ontological and gnoseological, support each other: what of human rights, and first and foremost of the dignity of each person, if the *intrinsic* worth and dignity of man were denied? What is the use of charters multiplying into infinity if the person himself is not granted a 'sacred' dignity? At the same time, though, it is impossible to deny the newness of certain rights (or of the abolition of certain practices, such as slavery), and here 'the proper achievement – a great achievement indeed – of the eighteenth century has been to bring out in full light the *rights* of man as also required by natural law' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 589).5 History thus plays its part through 'the development of the moral and social experience', to the point, even, that Maritain writes: 'what at any rate has been gained for the secular conscience, if it does not veer to barbarism, is faith in the march forward of humanity' (Maritain 1990: vol. VII, 854), but, and this mitigates the optimism displayed in the previous quotation, its role can be negative, too, if 'ideological errors' have come to taint these discoveries

4 *Ibid.*: 445. 5 Maritain 1951: 94. (individualist–anarchist or collectivist interpretations of rights or dignity) – errors that have not remained in the realm of ideas, but that have marked totalitarian regimes denounced by Maritain since the 1930s. This evidently calls for permanent vigilance on the part of the citizen and philosopher.

#### **Political scope**

The insistence on the dignity of every human may give rise to the impression that Maritain professes an individual personalism, one that is non-relational and ignores social and political life; it may make it seem that he concentrates his attention on isolated monads, valued only in and for themselves. Nothing could be further from the truth. For '[t]here is a correlation between this notion of the person as social unit and the notion of the *common good* as the end of the social whole. They imply one another. The common good is common because it is received in persons, each one of whom is as a mirror of the whole . . . The end of society, therefore, is neither the individual good nor the collection of the individual goods of each of the persons who constitute it . . . The end of society is the good of the community, of the social body.' 'The common good of the city . . . is the good *human life* of the multitude, of a multitude of persons; it is their communion in good living. It is therefore common to both *the whole and the parts* into which it flows back and which, in turn, must benefit from it. Unless it would vitiate itself, it implies and requires recognition of the fundamental rights of persons' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 200).6 It is not the relation between person and community that signifies the particularity of Maritain's 'personalism' here, for the person is not understood in his relation to a communal life. Rather, the concept of a person is to be understood in relation to the common good, in terms of their reciprocal development. In no way 'communitarian', as we would say today, Maritain rather insists on the dignity of the people (*peuple*), and he employs this old usage of 'people', which seems a bit outmoded, without batting an eyelid, and wholly endorses it. This concept is essential for his political philosophy (Maritain 1990: vol. VI, 443).7

In fact, 'under the inspiration of the Gospel at work in history, the secular conscience has understood the dignity of the people and the common man . . . The people are not God; the people do not have infallible reason and virtues without flaw; the will of the people or the spirit of the people is not the rule which decides what is just or unjust. But the people make up the slowly prepared and fashioned body of common humanity, the living patrimony of the common gifts and the common promises made to God's creature – which are more profound and more essential than all the additional privileges and the social distinctions – and of the equal dignity and the equal weakness of all as members of the human race' (Maritain 1990: vol. VII, 733). While the theological tone is already striking here, many more passages can be found in which

6 Maritain 1946: 436–7. 7 Maritain 1973: 130. Maritain heavily factors in the 'populace' (*commun du peuple*), always affirming the evangelical origin of his confidence in the people, for he refers to the 'people of the poor to whom the promise of the Beatitudes has been made and who enjoy an "eminent dignity" in the community of saints' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 379).8 He does, incidentally, provide a rather firm 'definition' of 'people': 'the people are the multitude of human persons who, united under just laws, by mutual friendship, and for the common good of their human existence, constitute a political society or a body politic. The notion of body politic means the whole unit composed of the people . . . Nay more, since the people are human persons who not only form a body politic, but who have each one a spiritual soul and a supratemporal destiny, the concept of the people is the highest and noblest concept among the basic concepts that we are analyzing' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 510–11).9

His insistence on the dignity of the people results in the idea of fraternity and that of pluralism. Fraternity is even seen as the 'primordial "myth" giving direction to common life', or as the 'essential dynamic principle' of democratic life (Maritain 1990: vol. VI, 520–1).10 In Maritain's eyes, the concept has a clear Christian origin, and does not only call for fraternity within communities, but also for fraternity between peoples, for attention to a shared humanity, or a humanity common to all of us, compelled by the dignity this humanity contains. The people, in turn, is not a compact mass, an undifferentiated multitude, a fuzzy and vague reference, convenient for all demagogies (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 381).11 It is formed in the course of a history, has known painful, tragic or happy experiences which are part of its heritage and its memorized values. It is therefore 'pluralistic', composed of 'social groupings and structures, each of them embodying positive liberties' (Maritain 1990: vol. VI, 477).12 It is, therefore, apposite to insist on 'The pluralist principle in democracy' (the title of Chapter 4 of *The Range of Reason*). This democratic regime, which, according to Maritain's stated preference, should be pluralistic, 'the society of tomorrow'; 'of men belonging to very different philosophical or religious creeds and lineages could and should co-operate in the common task and for the common welfare of the earthly community, provided they similarly assent to the charter and basic tenets of a society of free men' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 421).13 For Maritain also values the idea of a 'democratic credo' or of a fundamental charter wholly dedicated to human rights: his experience with UNESCO made him understand that it is necessary to both respect the irreducible diversities regarding conceptions of humanity and religion, and promote a common ground on which to find each other in order to develop solutions to problems common to all of humanity. Yet respect for this diversity does not imply that fundamental agreements are impossible. 'Men possessing quite different, even opposite metaphysical or religious outlooks, can converge,

```
8 Maritain 1953: 123.
                           9 Maritain 1951: 26.
                                                     10 Maritain 1973: 204.
11 Maritain 1953: 125.
                           12 Maritain 1973: 164.
                                                      13 Maritain 1951: 109.
```
not by virtue of any identity of doctrine, but by virtue of an analogical similitude in practical principles, toward the same practical conclusions, and can share in the same practical secular faith, provided that they similarly revere, perhaps for quite diverse reasons, truth and intelligence, human dignity, liberty, brotherly love, and the absolute value of moral good' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 611).14 We can see that, well before John Rawls, Maritain proposed such a charter as a sort of 'overlapping consensus': as long as parties can agree on certain values, such as human dignity, it should be possible to arrive at common practical conclusions, notwithstanding fundamental convictions, which can legitimately separate them. Democratic life must in some way or another disregard these ultimate references, rather extending itself to 'points of practical convergence' or basing itself on a 'unity of friendship' between citizens.

Still, it does not suffice to profess 'communal values', and inscribe these in constitutions or statutes. Where Maritain uses the term 'faith', which at this point we can consider out of place, then the point is to engage with these values, not only proclaim them intellectually, honour them verbally or include them in statutes. Granted, this 'faith' has a secular character, not supernatural, 'yet even a secular faith implies the commitment of the whole man and his innermost spiritual energies, and draws its strength, therefore, from beliefs which go far beyond scientific method' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 435).15 No democracy is worthy of its name, therefore, without the engagement of each and every person. No purely procedural 'democracy' which could result in the justification of any decision, even unjust ones, could follow from an honestly conducted debate. For a democracy implies citizens who engage in shared values and who gauge potential costs (those of the resistance against oppression, against traditions or against public opinion). Maritain does not support the idea of a sort of schizophrenia that proposes on the one hand communal beliefs and on the other parenthesized superior philosophical or religious principles. For 'the fact remains that democratic faith – implying as it does faith in justice, in freedom, in brotherly love, in the dignity of the human person, in his rights as well as in his responsibilities, in that power of binding men in conscience which appertains to just laws, in the deep-rooted aspirations which call for political and social coming of age of the people – cannot be justified, nurtured, strengthened, and enriched without philosophical or religious convictions . . . which deal with the very substance and meaning of human life' (*ibid*.: IX, 426).16 Another politically and philosophically essential consequence: it is in the name of his confidence in the people who 'remain the great granary of vital spontaneity and nonpharisaic living force' (*ibid*.: IX, 381),17 and the value accorded to pluralism that Maritain criticizes *the concept of the sovereignty* of the state. Such a concept is 'intrinsically illusory', for it presupposes that 'the people have absolutely deprived and divested themselves of their total power in order to transfer it to the sovereign' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 519).18 Now, the people cannot rob itself of what they are entitled to *ipso jure*, namely, the right to govern itself and to decide for itself. Presuming such a thing were possible for the benefit of a sovereign state results in the intrinsic dignity of the people – which lies in the fact that it is perfectly capable of governing itself – being ridiculed. Sovereignty strips the people of its rights; reduces it to the rank of a passive servant and, most of all, grants the state apparatus a 'separate and transcendent' power, which is a usurpation. Hence the sharp criticisms aimed at Bodin and Hobbes for having defended what Maritain considers a 'heresy'. Hence the repetition of one of Saint Augustine's theses in *City of God*: 'no human agent, nor any human institution, possesses by virtue of its own nature the right to govern men' (cf. *ibid*.: IX,530).19 A claim which leads in no way to anarchism if we admit that every right to power 'is possessed only' to the extent that a person or an institution are 'in the body politic a *part* at the service of the common good, a part which has received this right, within certain fixed bounds, from the people exercising their fundamental right to govern themselves' (*ibid*.: IX, 530).20 Maritain thus endorses Lincoln's definition, according to which democracy is the government of the people, by the people and for the people. Instead of surrendering oneself to a state which is supposed to situate itself above society, it is important to enliven the driving forces and the inherent group dynamics, count on the propensity of each and every person to strive for the good, and draw resources once more from the dynamics inherent to the people. The state has thus only an 'instrumental' role, in the service of and subordinate to the people and its capacity to govern itself as much as possible by itself. The dignity of the people, incidentally, is such that anti-democratic ideologies eliminate it, in favour of illusory and dangerous sovereignties (states, parties, charismatic chefs).

It should be self-evident that such a promotion of the people and of democracy by no means signifies a blind and demagogical exaltation of popular aspirations. The people must let itself be oriented and guided by the democratic charter, that is to say, by human rights and certain fundamental values of liberty, dignity, equality or solidarity (fraternity). The people is not a fully autonomous and independent whole; it doesn't find itself in a universal will which would infallibly guide it. It is bound to truth, and thus to the rational and patient search for this truth. 'But the body politic as such has an obligation to the truth to which the people themselves, the citizens who constitute the body politic – adhere in conscience. The body politic does not know another truth than that which the people know' (*ibid*.: IX, 675).21 A strong and almost excessive statement, if it were not embedded in the social philosophy mentioned above, and in a religious conception which opens the people towards a transcendence where it finds its dignity and its legitimacy.

Maritain's wager for the new civilization he hopes for is risky, for the initiation of democracy does not flow from an irrefutable logic that develops ineluctably

 Maritain 1951: 34. *Ibid.*: 43. *Ibid.*: 43–4. *Ibid.*: 166. towards democratic modernity. Rather, the ever difficult formation of democracies depends largely on the people's education, on their insight into the dignity of each human being and their own dignity, and thus on their morality and religion. Now, like other basic moral values, dignity is by no means secured once and for all. The people can deny itself; it can be seduced to accept slavery by the siren song of mendacious ideologies, as we have witnessed all too often in the reign of totalitarian Nazi or bolshevist regimes, or in crude dictatorial and tyrannical forms, but no less in the 'bourgeois' faux democracies which Maritain denounced in the 1930s. The philosopher, incidentally, had been contemplating the importance of general education for a long time already (Maritain 1990: vol. VI), and on the political level insisted on the role of 'prophetic shock minorities' – 'prophets' or 'sages' who shake up the passivity of the people, reveal the lack of awareness of serious matters or denounce the injustices not perceived or justified by the ideologies. It is worth noting that Maritain himself took up such responsibilities when he judged the dignity of persons or peoples to be spurned (Spain under Franco, denunciation of anti-Semitism in the 1930s, refusal to collaborate with the regime of Marshal Petain in Vichy in ´ 1940 etc.).

In this light, we can understand his insistence on the role of Christian religion for cultivating informed and alert moral consciences. It is no longer appropriate for the Churches to subordinate themselves as in the times of medieval Christianity, an era which Maritain considers lost. Their place is now to recollect the 'primacy of the spiritual', for it is in the awareness of its transcendent vocation and its supernatural dignity that man can resist positivisms and determinist thoughts which ruin its sense of its own proper dignity. Hence also the evangelist connotation of his confidence in the people. 'I believe', he writes, 'that the concept of the people as understood today . . . is derived from Christian and, so to speak, "parochial" sources. The idea of "the little people of Our Lord", or of the people of the poor to whom the promise of the Beatitudes has been made and who enjoy an "eminent dignity" in the communion of saints', which has 'contributed to the formation of the concept, this time an ethical–social one, of the working people – which is neither antiquity's rather civic and national idea of the *populus* nor yet its idea of the *plebs*' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 379–88).22 It should be added that, these days, this 'faith' in the people calls for anticipating a 'political unification of the world', since, for a variety of reasons (preventing wars, distributing the goods of the planet as fairly as possible), 'the community of peoples must form *one* people, even taking into account the qualifications to which such a pluralist unity would be subject' (Maritain 1990: vol. IX, 728).23 Here, once again, in the name of the 'conquest of dignity', people should be able to gain awareness of the imperative of this task, an imperative that cannot be ordained from far and above. 'Now, if a world political society is some day founded, it will be by means of freedom. *It is by means of freedom that the peoples of the earth will have been brought to a common will to live together*' (*ibid*.: IX, 725,

22 Maritain 1953: 123. 23 Maritain 1951: 209. emphasis in original).24 Here, again, the appeal to liberty respects the meaning of the dignity of peoples: if they are aware of their communal dignity even given their differences, they will be able to also want such political unification. But, still, they need to want it, and thus they will have to be convinced of their liberty and their dignity in order to betake themselves to a path that will be difficult and that will require sacrifices, for 'living together' implies 'suffering together', too (*ibid*.: IX, 727–8).25

For Maritain, then, dignity is not merely a concept attached to a single person. Dignity radiates onto the peoples themselves, and thus onto their beingtogether, either in nations, or, for the future, in a society that has become global. But how to ignore the fact that the awareness of this dignity depends largely on the philosophical and religious convictions which persons and peoples place ahead of an eminent value that lives in them and transcends them?

#### **References**

#### French originals

- Maritain, J. 1990. *Œuvres completes*. 17 vols. Fribourg: Editions Universitaires, Paris: Editions Saint-Paul (vol. VI, *Humanisme int´egral*; vol. VII, *Pour la justice*; vol. VII, *Pour une philosophie de l'´education*; vol. IX, *La personne et le bien commun*; vol. IX, *L'homme et l'Etat*; vol. IX, *Raison et raisons*)
#### English translations

- Maritain, J. 1939. 'Integral Humanism and the Crisis of Modern Times', *Review of Politics* 1(1): 1–17
	- 1946. 'The Person and the Common Good', trans. J. J. FitzGerald, *Review of Politics* 8(4): 419–55
	- 1951. *Man and the State*. University of Chicago Press
	- 1953. *The Range of Reason*. London: Geoffrey Bles
	- 1972. *Christianity and Democracy*, trans. D. C. Anson, reprinted edn, London: Ayer Publishing
	- 1973. *Integral Humanism*, trans. J. W. Evans. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press
- Several translations can also be accessed on the website of the Jacques Maritain Center, University of Notre Dame, http://maritain.nd.edu/jmc/etext

24 *Ibid.*: 206. 25 *Ibid.*: 207.