

---

## Scheler and human dignity

ZACHARY DAVIS

Within the human rights discourse of the twentieth century, dignity has come to assume a central and pivotal role. Nowhere has this been made more apparent than in the Preamble to the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, where dignity is understood as the foundation of 'freedom, justice and peace in the world'. The validity and legitimacy of universal human rights has consequently shifted and now rest in the supposed dignity of all persons. Yet, if dignity is the ground or basis for human rights, what is the ground or basis of dignity?

In his *magnum opus*, *Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values*, Max Scheler takes the question concerning the ground of human dignity as a primary motivation. As suggested by the subtitle of the work, *A New Attempt Toward the Foundation of an Ethical Personalism*, Scheler's task is to provide a new grounding, a phenomenological rather than rationalistic grounding, for the human being as a person and, consequently, a new grounding for the dignity of the person. For Scheler, any purely formal or rationalistic account of dignity leads to the depersonalization of the human being. The ground of dignity, rather, is the absolute value of the individual person given in the act of love, an act that reveals the other as a wholly unique and irreplaceable person.

Despite his criticisms of Kant, Scheler's approach still remains within the Kantian tradition of a search for an ethical *a priori* or universal axiology. This approach stands in sharp contrast to more recent attempts to formulate a post-metaphysical ethics and understanding of human dignity, attempts that reject an ethical *a priori* or universal notion of the person in light of the tremendous diversity that is covered under the international scope of human rights.1 Grounded in the absolute singularity of each and every person, Scheler provides an account that secures the universality of human rights without assuming a fixed or universal definition of the person.

<sup>1</sup> The view I have in mind here is perhaps best expressed by Michael Ignatieff. He writes, 'Pragmatic silence on ultimate questions has made it easier for a global human rights culture to emerge' (2001: 78).

#### **Scheler's value personalism and critique of formal (rational) ethics**

Despite the centrality that the dignity and value of the person have in Scheler's ethical thought, the term 'dignity' (*W¨urde*) is sparingly used by Scheler throughout his work. Its most frequent occurrence is in Scheler's *Formalism*, but, even here, Scheler makes little explicit mention of it. The task for Scheler was not to provide a new definition, but to reformulate the ground or basis of the dignity of the person.

The definition of dignity Scheler assumes is the one given by Kant in the *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*. In his discussion of the third formulation of the categorical imperative, the imperative understood within the context of the kingdom of ends, Kant writes: 'What has a price can be replaced by something else as its *equivalent*; what on the other hand is raised above all price and therefore admits of no equivalent has a dignity' (1996a: 4:434). Scheler makes reference to this definition of dignity only in his critique of Kant. Yet, without making any explicit reference to the notion of dignity or Kant, Scheler makes use of this distinction between that which has a price and that which is above all price when he distinguishes between relative and non-relative (or absolute) value. In the *Metaphysics of Morals*, Kant also speaks of dignity as 'an inner absolute worth' and places it within the context of treating oneself and others always as an end in itself and never merely as a means (1996b: 6:435). Scheler and Kant are in complete agreement on this point, namely, that the person is of absolute value and worth. Any action that would compromise the absolute value of a person, any action that would treat the person as if his or her worth were relative to some good or other end is evil. This shared understanding of dignity as an inner absolute worth by both Kant and Scheler is the sense of dignity that serves as the basis for much of the discourse concerning the universality of human rights.

Where Scheler parts ways with Kant is the grounds or justification of this absolute value of the person. When Kant introduces the notion of dignity in the *Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals*, he does so by first speaking of the dignity of all rational beings and declares that the dignity of the rational being is found in the obedience to only those laws which the rational being gives to itself (1996a: 4:435). Kant concludes his discussion of dignity in the *Groundwork* by writing that '*autonomy* is the ground of the dignity of human nature and of every rational nature' (1996a: 4:436). Both the identification of the person as a rational being and the grounding of dignity in autonomy are, for Scheler, direct consequences of Kant's strictly formal, i.e. purely rational, approach to ethics, and are expressions of the type of depersonalization present in a formal ethics. By depersonalization Scheler means the process by which a concrete individual person is treated or regarded as merely a formal category. To define the person as a rational person means 'that the person is basically nothing but a logical subject of rational acts, i.e. acts that follow these [moral] laws' (Scheler 1973:371). There is nothing in particular about the individual human being that makes him or her a person other than the fact that he or she is 'some X of rational activity'.

In order to overcome the depersonalization of the human being, Scheler rejects the assumption that only a formal ethics is able to found the dignity of the human being and demonstrates that the experience of value ultimately grounds both the objectivity of ethics (the ethical *a priori*) and the dignity (absolute value) of the person. For Scheler, all that is given in the experience of value is not necessarily relative to the subject. The content of value experience transcends the subject to reveal both an objective ordering of value and the absolute value of person.

All experience is, according to Scheler, value-latent. Value is the most primordial relation we have to the world (1966: 40). Before the world is perceived or known, it is valued (1963: 77–98). Evidence of this primordial relation is the allure the world has upon us. The world entices us to perceive and know it and as such is given in a type of relief. Things in the world bear value as they bear sensible qualities such as colour and taste. According to Scheler, we see the beauty or pleasantness of the landscape as we see its bright hues (1966: 41).

Values are grasped immediately and are intuitively given in the act of feeling. Scheler rejects the traditional, philosophical prejudice that takes feelings as mere psychological states. Feelings are, for Scheler, intentional acts, exhibiting their own inherent logic (1966: 261). The two most primordial feelings are love and hate. Love, for Scheler, is an intentional act that discloses originally positive values; hate is the act wherein negative values are disclosed. As Brentano had earlier shown, there are so-called axioms, purely essential relations, that are co-given with the disclosure of positive and negative values. Positive values are given as that which ought to be, while negative values are given as that which ought not to be (1966: 100). These axioms pertain to the essence of the value and are thus not subject-relative, but objective, relating to the nature of value itself.

The distinction between positive and negative values introduces a further element of the givenness of value, namely, the act of preferring. It is with this aspect of preferring that we discover the material *a priori* that grounds Scheler's value ethics. All feelings, and love and hate in particular, are an act of preferring. Love is the preferring of positive value to negative, while hate is the reverse. Among the positive values, Scheler distinguishes among five value modalities: pleasure, utility, life, spirit and the holy. Exhibited in the act of love is a preferring of the higher values to the lower, or, as Pascal would say, an *ordre du coeur*. Love is the movement towards ever higher value, while hate is the movement towards lower value (1973: 160). The five value modalities have an essential and thus objective rank ordering. Utility is preferred to pleasure; life to utility, spirit to life and holy to spirit. What may be considered to bear the value of life or the holy is culturally relative. Yet, that the holy is to be preferred and of higher value than life is not culturally relative. It is an objective rank ordering of value, a material *a priori* that is given in the experience of value.

#### **The ground of dignity**

Dignity, understood as the absolute value of the person, remains the highest of the values (1966: 495). The values of spirit and the holy are personal values, but these are simply distinctive value modalities and are quite different from speaking of the value of the individual person. As is also the case with Kant, persons are of absolute value. The difference for Scheler is that this absolute value is given in experience. Relative and absolute are qualities of value given immediately and intuitively (1966: 116). That is, we experience a bearer of value as either relative or absolute. In contrast to a formal account, the absolute value of the person is, according to Scheler, given as absolute in the experience of the other person. By absolute, Scheler means that which has no equivalent value. What is of absolute value is, strictly speaking, not a thing or object, nothing that could in principle be represented by something else. Any attempt to objectify the person is necessarily an act of degradation, a compromise of a person's absolute value.

The only act wherein the absolute value (dignity) of the person is given is in the act of love (1966: 480). As such, dignity is immediately and intuitively grasped. There is no proof of the dignity of the person other than that which is self-evident in the act of loving another person. Furthermore, the value and dignity of the person is wholly unique (1966: 508). Though every person is of absolute value, no value is the same. No one can take the place of another person or absolute value. The absolute value of the person is given in a unique manner to the person, to the loving of the individual. Scheler's notion of dignity is a highly personalized notion. Each and every person has his own unique dignity. We as persons may all be of absolute value, but no one person is the same or of the same value. There is, in this respect, a value inequality. The dignity of all persons ought to be respected. Yet, the manner in which we love and respect the other person is unique to that person.

It is, thus, not a formal category, but *radical singularity* that grounds the dignity of the person. The conception of the person as unique follows directly from Scheler's correction of the Kantian definition of the person as rational being. For Scheler, the person indeed commits rational acts, but the being of the person is not reducible to its being rational. A rational act is just one among a host of intentional acts a person executes, acts such as loving and hating. The whole person is 'contained' in every one of his or her acts, but is yet irreducible to any one of these acts or the summation of the total acts of a lifetime (1966: 385). The person is non-objectifiable, cannot be represented by any particular act or class of acts.2 Scheler defines the person as 'the concrete and essential unity of being of acts of different essences' (1966: 382). By 'unity', Scheler means the peculiarity or distinctiveness in which the individual person executes and lives

<sup>2</sup> In his later works, Scheler defends the non-objectifiability of the person with respect to his concept of *Geist*. See Scheler 1976: 39.

in his or her acts (1966: 386). Hence, the being of the person is not a substance, but a particular style, a unique style in which the individual loves, thinks and wonders – a style of one's own. The dignity or absolute value of the person is inseparable from the uniqueness of the person. It is always the dignity of this person that is given in the act of love, not the dignity of persons in general. There is no love of humanity or love of the dignity of the human being.3 Love is always directed to the being and value of the individual person and it is in this act that the unique and absolute value of the person is given.

Although love is considered by Scheler to be a radically singular act directed at a particular person, there is a universal element in the experience of the other person as absolute value. This universal element is crucial for any concept of human rights which assumes some type of respect for all human beings. For Scheler, given in the experience of the other human being as person is the meaning of person itself. The other is given as person, as a being of absolute value, a being who shall never be treated in a manner that compromises his or her dignity. Hence, the meaning of person is co-given in the love of the other and as such the obligation to respect the dignity of all persons is also co-given. Scheler indeed rejects any general love of humanity, but demonstrates how the love of another assumes the love of all persons, a universal respect for the dignity of each and every human being. Universal human rights would, for Scheler, be one way in which to articulate the moral and political responsibility entailed in the meaning of person.

#### **Solidarity and human rights**

The final aspect of Scheler's notion of dignity concerns the distinction between self-love and love of others. This distinction follows that between the respect of one's own dignity and the respect for the dignity of others. For Scheler, the love of others is wholly distinct from but equally primordial to self-love (1966: 489). The dignity and absolute value of the other has its own distinctive means of givenness from that of one's own dignity. As a consequence, a distinctive sense of responsibility is implied in the dignity of others from that of the self. Not only am I wholly responsible for my own actions and how my actions respect the dignity of others, I am also co-responsible for all persons and their actions. This sense of co-responsibility does not mean that I take responsibility from the person who has committed the act of evil. Every person is fully responsible for his or her actions. Yet, because of the genuine love of the other, I share responsibility for the degradation of the person. When a person is degraded I am called to act for that person, not because I was the cause, but because I love the other. Scheler calls this dual sense of the responsibility the principle of solidarity. There are different levels of depth in solidarity, of the scope and sense of co-responsibility. Dignity is operative at the deepest level of solidarity,

3 For Scheler's critique of modern humanism, see Scheler 1955: 96–113.

a moral community of love. The scope of this sense of solidarity is infinite, not limited by cultural or political borders.4

Scheler has very little to say as to how his notion of solidarity rooted in the wholly unique dignity of the person relates to the notion of human rights. In general, he is sceptical of any suggestion of a universal responsibility and has great reservations concerning modern humanism. Any human rights discourse that begins with a reduction of the individual person to a universal category or substance leads ultimately to a depersonalization of the dignity of the person, resulting in practices that disregard the utter uniqueness of each and every person. In order to rescue human rights discourse from this danger, human rights would have to be articulated, according to Scheler, within the context of solidarity and the distinctive sense of responsibility rooted in the love of the other. Rooted in the principle of solidarity, human rights discourse becomes personalized, comes to be directed to the particular, individual person.

Due to his premature death (1928), Scheler was unable to complete his major work on politics, *Politik und Moral* (*Politics and Morality*). In this work, there is at least the promise of clarification on the relation between solidarity and the growing campaign for an international recognition of universal human rights. This is an avenue of Scheler's thought that has been under-developed.5 Nevertheless, Scheler is unequivocally clear that the task of both morality and politics is the realization of the deeper personal values such as dignity, and, at the most profound level of human solidarity, all persons are called to act for the abolition of any degradation of the individual person or community of persons. While Scheler has relatively little to say on what this call to act on behalf of a person's right means in practice, he remains committed to the idea that this call springs from nothing other than the absolute singularity of each and every human being.

#### **References**

Blosser, P. 1995. *Scheler's Critique of Kant's Ethics*. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press Brunkhorst, H. 2005. *Solidarity: From Civic Friendship to a Global Legal Community*,

- trans. J. Flynn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
- Ignatieff, M. 2001. *Human Rights as Politics and Idolatry*, ed. Amy Gutman. Princeton University Press
- Kant, I. 1996a. *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, in *The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy*, trans. M. Gregor. Cambridge University Press
- 4 For a more detailed treatment of Scheler's notion of the life-community, see Ranly 1966.
- 5 In his work, *Solidarity: From Civic Friendship to a Global Legal Community*, Hauke Brunkhorst has provided the fullest and most cogent account of the relation between solidarity and human rights. However, this work does develop this relation with respect to Scheler's notion of solidarity or dignity.

- 1996b. *The Metaphysics of Morals*, in *The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy*, trans. M. Gregor. Cambridge University Press
Ranly, E. W. 1966. *Scheler's Phenomenology of Community*. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff

- Scheler, Max. 1966. *Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die Materiale Wertethik: Neuer Versuch der Grundlegung eines Ethischen Personalismus*, in *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. II, ed. M. Scheler. Bern: Francke Verlag
	- 1955.*Das Ressentiment im Aufbau der Moralen. Vom Umsturz der Werte: Abhhandlungen und Aufs¨atze*, in *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. III, ed. M. Scheler. Bern: Francke Verlag
	- 1963. 'Liebe und Erkenntnis', *Schriften zur Soziologie und Weltanschauungslehre*, in *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. VI, ed. M. Scheler. Bern: Francke Verlag
	- 1973. *Wesen und Formen der Sympathie: Die Deutsche Philosophie der Gegenwart*, in *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. VII, ed. M. S. Frings. Bern: Francke Verlag
	- 1976. *Die Stellung des Menschen im Kosmos. Sp¨ate Schriften*, in *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. IX, ed. M. S. Frings. Bern: Francke Verlag