

---

### Dignity, fragility, singularity in Paul Ricœur's ethics

MAUREEN JUNKER-KENNY

Both in his approach to ethics and in his treatment of concrete cases as matters of 'practical wisdom', Paul Ricœur has developed a distinctive position towards grounding and specifying what is called 'human dignity' in Kant. It appears in references to what is 'above all price', using Kant's term for indicating what is not at our disposition since it is the foundation, not the object of our autonomy (Ricœur 2005: 237).1 The reference to dignity is not made explicit, but is present in examples of its denial which give rise to the moral feeling of 'indignation', and in identifying the limit of tolerance in what is 'intolerable' (Ricœur 1996: 198–9).2 While it does not belong to the terms that are subjected to an analysis of the philosophical problems contained in them, such as 'autonomy' and 'imputability', it is given a place of immediate evidence:

[I]n Kant himself, the subjective side of imputation relies on moral feelings that constitute what he called the rational motives of action. Only one motive, only

- 1 'History showcases the ever-increasing defeat of what is without price, driven back by the advances of a commercial society . . . The question then arises: Do any noncommercial goods still exist? . . . Conversely, perhaps we can find the gift in every form of what is priceless, whether it is moral dignity, which has a value but not a price, or the integrity of the human body, and the non-commercialization of its organs' (Kant 1964: 102–3). Kant states: 'In the kingdom of ends, everything has either a *price* or a *dignity*. If it has a price, something else can be put in its place as an *equivalent*; if it is exalted above all price and so admits of no equivalent, then it has a dignity. What is relative to universal human inclinations and needs has a *market price*. . . but that which constitutes the sole condition under which anything can be an end in itself has not merely a relative value – that is, a price – but has an intrinsic value – that is, *dignity*.'
- 2 'The occasions to be indignant present themselves in dispersed order: what is there in common between the disgust sparked by the crime of a paedophile, the horror that continues to inspire the stories of deportation and extermination camps, the contempt ignited by vicious attacks of rampaging slander directed against an honest man, the revolt against the manifestations of racism, against the disguised returns of slavery, against the extreme inequalities, against the politics of exclusion? . . . If then it were possible to recognize in indignation, an eminently reactive feeling, a positive motivation, it would be the responsibility with regard to the fragile in its multiple forms.'

one reason is considered by Kant: respect. One of the tasks of moral philosophy today would be to enlarge, to expand, the field of moral feelings concerning shame, courage, admiration, enthusiasm, veneration, indignation. These feelings have to do with dignity, a kind of immediate recognition of the dignity of a moral subject. (Ricœur 2002: 287)

As his interest in the feelings that express the human capability for morality shows, Ricœur sees the need to elaborate the connection between Kant's formal concept of freedom and its concrete appearance; he treats the capabilities of speaking, acting and narrating as components of a self-understanding that reaches a normative level in 'imputability'. He seeks to align Kant's foundational concept of the 'good will' with the Aristotelian starting-point of each individual's motivation to lead a flourishing life. Beginning with 'solicitude', the moral dimension is no longer a demand isolated in its contrast to inclination, but is linked to an anthropology of human striving 'to live with and for others in just institutions' (Ricœur 1992: 72). The content of autonomy, respect for the moral law and for the other, is reinterpreted as being 'a wish before it is an imperative' (Ricœur 2007: xv).3 Reworking Kant's approach in light of Aristotle's, Ricœur emphasizes the *intention* of morality both at its starting-point and in concrete judgments; he explores the motivation for moral action, and its application within the specific domains in which 'equitable' solutions have to be found that honour both the singularity of persons and the universal norm. Before turning to the spheres of law, biomedical ethics, and memories of violence and forgiveness in which the concrete meaning of dignity has to be specified, I shall outline the framework established for ethics by his philosophical anthropology and hermeneutics of action.

#### **Capable, fragile and striving: self and agency in Ricœur's anthropology and ethics**

In his analysis of core human capabilities that lead up to 'imputability', the hermeneutical philosopher is careful to outline the transitions from one course of enquiry to another. Beginning with a 'minimal definition of capability as the power to cause something to happen' (Ricœur 2006: 18), he develops the capabilities to speak, act and narrate as competences which allow agents to experience their power of initiative but which need supporting conditions to be realized concretely (discussed in the first subsection). With 'imputability', a form of self-recognition arises that brings in a different dimension, a reversal from mastery to need, as well as an ethical reflection on what is good, right and equitable (discussed in the second subsection).

- 3 'Justice, in this reading, is an integral part of the wish to live well . . . the wish to live in just institutions arises from the same level of morality as do the desire for personal fulfilment and the reciprocity of friendship. The just is first an object of desire, of a lack, of a wish. It begins as a wish before it is an imperative.'
#### Capabilities and the need for institutions to enable concrete realizations of freedom

The specifically human capabilities of speaking and acting spontaneously receive a reflective turn in the ability to narrate which constitutes the possibility of biographical and moral identity. In narrating its story, the self is characterized by a dialectic between two aspects: continuity and sameness on the one hand, and spontaneity on the other, the first designated as *idem*, the second as *ipse*. New departures and self-definitions can be worked out by taking a stance to what is given and inherited, by reviewing courses of action and reconceiving goals. It takes effort to construct the 'narrative unity of a life', as Ricœur calls it (with Alasdair MacIntyre), and it faces temptations for easy solutions, such as self-serving and ideological rationalizations.

The successive questions – who speaks to whom? Who acts with or against other agents? Who tells stories about himself or herself and about strangers held as friends or enemies? – find a kind of culmination in the question: who is capable of imputation? (Ricœur 2006: 20)

This culmination, however, does not mean that the prior self-expressions can be superseded. Imputability as the ultimate designation that unites them in a different register depends on the continued availability of the first three capabilities. The insight that there is no imputability without the prior experience of competence in speaking, acting and narrating will affect the concrete interpretations of dignity that will be examined below. The juridical sphere of criminal law, based on the necessary assumption of a generic accountability, has to seek to understand individual circumstances in concrete cases of judgment.

Being designated as author in the use of one's capabilities moves the analysis into a different territory: from a 'descriptive' to a 'normative' framework (Ricœur 2006: 18, 22). The 'rights' that some theorists, among them Amartya Sen and Martha Nussbaum, seek to develop in connection with capabilities, are identified as belonging to a different order, which reveals a need that assumes interaction with others. Rights have to be granted, or can be disputed, they do not follow automatically from the existence of specific capabilities. With a primary interest in the concrete historical realization of rights, not in the Kantian emphasis on duties as their counterpart, Ricœur analyzes them as a matter of 'creative conflictuality' (Ricœur 2006: 23) that has already made the step to conceive negativity as a moment within a process of recognition. At stake is the choice between two paradigms in interpreting the conflicts that arise between humans: in terms of a fundamentally negative attitude to otherness which is seen as threatening the survival of the self, or from a 'normative motivation' whereby the social bond is constituted by recognizing and negotiating requests. In this framework, the key need is not conceived as a Hobbesian struggle for survival, but as a quest for *recognition* as an equal. The motivation to mutually grant each other such a status is a moral one, rather than naturalistic and compelled by fear (Ricœur 2005: 170). At this stage of the debate, in his analysis of the necessary steps to link the anthropological concept of capabilities to the legal concept of rights, Ricœur remains at the level of legality, of the creation of institutions in which the key term of Kant's deontology, 'respect', can be translated into juridical structures that underpin the 'historical actualization of freedom' (Ricœur 2006: 22). This level is about equality in terms of rights, as Ricœur's quote from Joel Feinberg makes clear: 'What we call "human dignity" is nothing else than the recognized capacity to require a right' (Ricœur 2006: 24).4 This definition operationalizes dignity as recognizing the quest for new rights in the interest of new subjective capabilities; their refusal is experienced as contempt. As in the global discrepancy between 'the equal *ascription* of rights and the unequal *distribution* of primary goods', also in the sphere of symbolic recognition 'a negative motivation is a powerful factor of social change'. Ricœur adds as conditions two factors that belong to the sphere of ethics – 'self-respect' and a 'will' to engage in political action – for this motivation to be successful: 'under the condition of a parallel increase of self-respect and of the will to play a role in the enlargement of the sphere of subjective rights' (Ricœur 2006: 24) .

What needs to be analyzed now is the way in which Ricœur interprets this quest for recognition in the shape of rights; it is in terms that presuppose an intrinsic understanding of dignity, not merely the form it takes in political struggles.

[R]ecognition in the juridical sense (of each person as free and equal) adds to the basic capabilities considered in our first part under the aegis of self-recognition the new capabilities proceeding from the conjunction between the universal validity of the norm and the singularity of the persons. (Ricœur 2006: 24)

By contrasting 'universality' and 'singularity', he introduces a limit also to the norm, proposing a radicalized version of Kant's notion of respect for human beings as ends in themselves: in cases of conflict between duties, the ultimate point of reference is not the universal rule but the individual as an end in herself.5

- 4 Quoting from Feinberg 1980.
<sup>5</sup> In the section entitled 'Respect and Conflict' in Ricœur 1992: 262–73, the author elaborates on the hidden contradiction in the famous humanistic formulation of the Categorical Imperative: 'a fine dividing line tends to separate the universalist version of the imperative, represented by the idea of humanity, from what can be called the pluralist version, represented by the idea of persons as ends in themselves. According to Kant, there is no opposition here, to the extent that humanity designates the dignity *by reason of which* persons deserve respect, despite – so to speak – their plurality. The possibility of conflict arises, however, as soon as the otherness of persons, inherent in the very idea of *human* plurality, proves to be, in certain remarkable circumstances, incompatible with the universality of the rules that underlie the idea of humanity. Respect then tends to split up into respect for the law and respect for persons. Under these conditions, practical wisdom may consist in

The tension between 'universal' and 'singular' is mirrored in the architecture of Ricœur's ethics which will be explained in the following subsection. It will investigate how dignity in the intrinsic sense appears at each of its levels.

#### Ethics as solicitude, moral norm, and singularity in practical wisdom

Prior to analyzing the distinctive feature of each level in the sequence of selfreflection on the ethical and moral dimensions of agency, the field of practical reason has to be characterized.

#### From imputability to attestation

In the preceding reflections offered by Ricœur as clarifications towards the efforts of some fellow-theorists, 'imputability' has been identified as a turningpoint to a normative analysis. It takes acts as having individuals as their authors and thus opens up their qualification not just as socially given, but as claiming 'validity'. However, the question of imputability belongs to the sphere of theoretical discourse in which the Kantian antinomy between freedom and determination by natural laws is under debate (Ricœur 2006: 19, 21). In the sphere of practical reason, by contrast, the challenge of opposite interpretations is not in terms of cosmological, but of existential truth.6 In ethics, imputability becomes the claim to autonomy which is a matter of 'attestation'; its opposite is 'suspicion', as opposed to a theoretical questioning of its status (2006: 18). A contestation of freedom in the practical sense of agency cannot be refuted by theoretical reasons but only resisted in a living proof.

The following analyses spell out a position that clearly indicates where it takes up and where it parts company with classical and contemporary approaches to social ethics. Its well-known combination of two approaches that are usually understood as opposites – an Aristotelian ethics of striving for a flourishing life and a Kantian analysis of the human experience of moral self-reflection – will be discussed only insofar as it provides a framework in which human dignity is situated: seeking its foundations in a desire that already includes the aspiration towards just structures also for anonymous others; exploring the need in view of human violence to rise to the obligation to respect the other as a limit to the self's wishes; and conceiving a third level, 'practical wisdom', in which the faculty of judgment is dedicated to combining the critically examined insights of the first two. Ricœur argues for the possibility of seeking convergences between the two historically opposed approaches. The first decisive move is to interpret Aristotle beyond the limits of the *polis*, effectively broadening a communitarian

giving priority to the respect for persons, in the name of the solicitude that is addressed to persons in their irreplaceable singularity' (Ibid.: 262). Cf. also *ibid*.: 222.

<sup>6</sup> The distinction and the relationship between theoretical and practical truth claims is discussed in Ricœur 2007: 58–71.

framework into a cosmopolitan one, and to take Kant's foundational concept of the 'good will' as an indication of the originating benevolence human beings desire to extend to each other. Ricœur highlights not only the shared symbolic world in which the individual's quest for existence takes place and the distancing ability7 required in relationships, but also analyzes the self in its quality as an 'other'.

#### Three levels of ethics emerging in self-reflection on agency

Ricœur approaches the self in its ethical dimension from the way in which it perceives its agency. Understanding the whole realm of action as oriented towards the anticipation of being able to evaluate the ultimate unity of one's biography as a flourishing life, Ricœur identifies the elements belonging to this aim (*vis´ee*) as 'living well, with and for others, in just institutions' (Ricœur 1992: 172). The good thus consists, as Christof Mandry has observed, both in a formal goal, namely, the narrative unity of a life, and in a substantive one, albeit expressed without naming specific goods, as the capability to act.8 Already this level contains a normative dimension, in perceiving and agreeing that the 'others' one lives 'with and for' have the same desire and should have the same opportunity to access resources for action. The capability for morality on which human dignity is based for Kant can be seen to find an initial expression in the spontaneous benevolence called 'solicitude.'

On the one hand, against Kant's dichotomy between inclination and duty, Ricœur highlights the continuity present in the 'good will' extolled by Kant as the only thing that can be 'taken as good without qualification'.9 On the other hand, he equally spells out the distinct character of the second, moral level in its formality and universality. The metaphor for this type of reflection on one's action, 'sieve of the norm' (Ricœur 1992: 170), indicates an act of critical discernment between maxims or intentions that either respect or violate the other. If 'self-esteem' was based on the awareness of one's capability to act, 'selfrespect' is won by going against some possibilities of action and by recognizing the other also as a limit to one's own agency. Here, the previously defended continuity between the inclination to benevolence and duty is interrupted by the call of conscience which Ricœur identifies as one form of otherness in the

- 7 Ricœur 2006: 23, as distinct from a 'fusional attachment'.
- 8 Mandry 2002: 219–20: 'The "good" contains a hidden double function . . . a teleological goal orientation . . . towards the integrating good of the flourishing life . . . [O]n the other hand, however, a content determination, even if only in its formal shape', resulting in a 'connection between striving for the "good" and the self-esteem which has its foundation in being able to act (*Tun-K¨onnen*)' (translation by the present author).
- 9 The opening sentence of Kant's *Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals* reads: 'It is impossible to conceive anything at all in the world, or even out of it, which can be taken as good without qualification, except a *good will*' (BA 1).

self (Ricœur 1992: 341–55). The ability for independent, principled judgment is also highlighted against the historical experience of the need to resist the pull towards conformity and to stand up against corrupted institutions, as in the National Socialist state and other totalitarian regimes in the twentieth century. Such opposition can be seen as historical examples of intrinsic dignity, as the concrete capability to discern and defend what is morally relevant also at a cost to oneself.

Most of all, however, dignity is identified with singularity in the conflict that erupts between regard for the rule and doing justice to the individual. It is the reason why a third level, 'practical wisdom', is introduced: it has the task of judging in conflicts of duties which course of action is relatively the best to protect persons as ends in themselves, in their irreducible plurality, also from rigoristic applications of norms. These need to be tested not only for their universalizability, but also for their equity in relation to agents in their particularity. This level will allow questions to surface that could not be known at the theoretical level of constructing the architecture of ethics: about the self, who is more than the sum of his (successful or failed) acts; about the role of asymmetry, of love in relation to justice, and of the gift as a unilateral initiative; about religious and cultural traditions that can reinvigorate their own heritage of supporting dignity by addressing their unkept promises.

#### **Dignity in concrete interpretations by practical wisdom**

We have seen from the preceding account that the premises on which Ricœur establishes the foundations for an ethics of justice are fundamentally different from contract theories. Their pattern of strict reciprocity is absent, and a readiness to engage in one-sided, asymmetric action uncertain of any return is implied: the wish for a flourishing life includes living with and for others; the capability for morality is evidenced at the second level where decisions against one's self-interest are taken, rising to what the agent's conscience urges; and at the third level the needs of human beings in their singularity, not in their contract obligations, are key. What follows is the exploration of processes of judgment on how to concretize dignity as an absolute value under finite, culturally particular conditions. It is to be expected that Ricœur's interest will not be whether specific liberty rights are being violated, but how to do justice to the normative core of any rights-based system of governance. This is where both Kant and he differ from a liberal emphasis on rights. It is not just the state that is asked to deliver but also the citizens; they are seen first and foremost as solicitous and moral beings. It is true that all they can be committed to externally is legality in the sense of outward observance of the law; yet this qualification is to protect freedom of motivation and conscience and does not absolve citizens from their sense of morality. The one-sided readiness to respect even the hostile other challenges an understanding of ethics that can be fulfilled by mere reciprocity. As the counterpoint to a mere 'logic of equivalence' Ricœur introduces religious motives, namely, '*agape*', nourished by 'superabundance' and an 'economy of the gift' (for example, Ricœur 1995).

However, beyond Kant's idea that the guiding principle – to honour humanity in one's own person and in that of every other – is self-explanatory, the hermeneutical philosopher points out a double need for interpretation: both of the principle, and of the situation and individuals in question (Mandry 2002: 221). In the three domains to be examined now, (1) criminal law, (2) intellectual and mental disability, and (3) memories of histories of violence, it has to be specified how 'dignity' can be recognized and safeguarded through adequate conceptual analyses, institutions and policies.

#### The dignity of the offender in criminal law

The approach Ricœur takes in his article, 'Autonomy and Vulnerability', is that of a philosophical anthropology in which the 'paradox' of autonomy and vulnerability is uncovered (Ricœur 2007, 72–3). What now becomes decisive is the connection established before between the four capabilities of speaking, acting, narrating and being imputable: 'Let us say therefore that a subject capable of leading his or her life in agreement to an idea of narrative coherence is an autonomous subject' (Ricœur 2007: 80). Yet, what about those who have not acquired the narrative capacity to evaluate their deeds against their intentions and motivations? Here, Ricœur alerts lawyers to the possibility that:

jurists run the greater risk of having to deal with individuals who are incapable of constructing a narrative identity, of identifying themselves not only through some history but with some history . . . The handling of one's own life, as a possibly coherent narrative, represents a high level competence that has to be taken as one of the major components of the autonomy of a subject of rights. (Ricœur 2007: 79–80)

When it comes to the institutional level of a court case, a discrepancy is noted: 'what the codes disavow are violations of the law – but what the courts punish are persons' (Ricœur 2004: 489). These persons, however, are being identified as authors in senses they may not experience themselves. Society's task is to institutionalize ways in which the failure of early processes of inclusion and participation can still be turned around: 'Punishment has two ends, a shortterm one, which is the protection of society as regards a threat to public order, and a long-term one, which is the restoration of social peace. Every measure of rehabilitation, in our penal system, is meant to serve this ultimate end' (Ricœur 2007: 230). The social bond has been broken not only by the perpetrator. What needs to find symbolic expression in penal institutions, is the equal value of each fellow-citizen:

[M]oral philosophy has always underscored the connection between justice and equality . . . This model of distributive justice presupposes a more radical form of equality, equality in the value of every agent. The formula for this basic kind of equality is: your life is as important, as significant, as valuable as my own. (Ricœur 2007: 224)

The goal and standard for evaluations of penal systems is their ability to reintegrate the person who has become guilty in front of the law and against specific fellow-citizens:

We are confronted with the absence of a practical alternative to such a loss of liberty through imprisonment. Admitting this is equivalent to admitting a collective failure on the part of our society . . . What remains is the duty to preserve for those detainees the possibility of their reinscription into the community of free citizens . . . to put an end to the physical and symbolic exclusion which is imprisonment. (Ricœur 2007: 230)

The goal of the judicial system is to 'transfer conflicts from the plane of violence to that of language and discourse' (Ricœur 2007: 221). In each case, practical wisdom conducts a double interpretation of the narratives of the incident and of the specific laws in question violated by the offense. What links these agents to the next group is a fragility that appears in their lack of articulacy and integration into the symbolic world of a society. The question arising with regard to mentally and intellectually disabled fellow-humans is how to arrive at an adequate analysis of their difference while equally highlighting the shared condition of fragility and mortality.

#### Respect as a response to the difference and vulnerability of intellectual disability

In this essay, the task of translating the absolute value of dignity is directed both to structures and to relationships. It is about laying 'the basis for respect – and, beyond such respect, for the friendship – we owe to the physically and mentally handicapped, as well as to all others struck by infirmities' (Ricœur 2007: 187–97, 187). Ricœur analyzes how a medical deficit model underrates capacities and feeds into an additional social rejection based on an attitude of possessing health as an asset. The alternative model is to see all human life as capable of perception and initiative in its environment, and to encourage an understanding of shared vulnerability that does not have to be the opposite of happiness.10

Distinguishing (with Georges Canguilhem) a biological, a social and an existential sense of the pathological, he opposes the negative reading in which 'the pathological signifies a deficit or deficiency' with a positive one in which 'it signifies another, an *other* organization, one that has its own laws' (Ricœur

<sup>10</sup> Ricœur (1992: 269) refers to 'the proper use of solicitude, when it moves in the narrow space where it remains true that there is no ethics without happiness, but where it is false that happiness excludes suffering'.

2007: 190). The existential level of an encounter with 'this other way of being-inthe-world, with its own values' gives rise to 'respect' (*ibid*.: 190). This analysis presupposes a capability that Ricœur had identified also in other contexts, namely, the possibility to enter into a different world, to actively attempt to understand difference between humans in their aspirations. In his discussion of different spheres of valuation, the underlying ability identified is one of crossing borders.

[W]e can develop a typology of the types of criticism directed by one world to another . . . the most interesting issue . . . lies in the capacity to awaken the actors of one world to the values of another world . . . A new dimension of personhood is thereby revealed, that of understanding a world other than one's own, a capacity we can compare to that of learning a foreign language to the point of being able to appreciate one's own language as one among many. (Ricœur 2005: 209)

This awareness of a foundational likeness, comparability and translatability is at the basis of recognizing dignity in diversity, even if the difference is one of disease. It is a matter of 'recognition of positive values attached to any disease . . . something other than a deficiency, a lack, a negative quantity. It is another way of being in the world. It is in this sense that the patient has dignity, is an object of respect. The value of the disease and of the patient remains even within the shadow of madness' (Ricœur 2007: 197).11 The task for physicians, carers and friends is to compensate for lost functions, without, however, extinguishing the other's own initiative that remains crucial for their self-esteem:

How are we to reach, beyond the disease, the patient's still-possible resources of the will to live, of initiative, of evaluation, of decision? . . . [S]elf-esteem . . . also includes within itself an expectation of approbation coming from these others. In this sense, self-esteem is both a reflexive and a relational phenomenon, where the notion of dignity unites the two faces of such recognition. (Ricœur 2007: 194, 196)

'Reflexivity' relates to the awareness of one's power to act, which is thus taken in an existence-related rather than a cognitive sense. Ricœur concludes the article that is dedicated to Jean Vanier, the founder of the Arche communities for people with intellectual disabilities, with a reflection on the basic human condition:

It is important for the supposedly healthy individual to discern in the handicapped individual those resources of conviviality, of sympathy, of living with and suffering with that are bound expressly to the fact of being ill or handicapped. Yes, it is up to those who are well to welcome this proposition regarding the meaning of

- 11 In Ricœur 2007: 194, he observes that the 'threat of madness, along with the fear of social retribution, replaces the fear of hell'.
illness and to allow it to aid them in bearing their own precariousness, their own vulnerability, their own mortality. (Ricœur 2007: 197)

#### Histories of violence and forgiveness as a gift

A high regard for spontaneity, for agency as a quest for existence, for trust in fellow humans and a 'fiduciary connection' (Ricœur 2007: 100, 105) rather than defence of one's negative rights, has become evident in Ricœur's reconstructions of basic human capabilities and pursuits. However, agency does not completely define the self. In his reflections on forgiveness after the monumental histories of violence that have marked the twentieth century, he identifies as the crucial move the willingness and ability to release an agent from her acts by first distinguishing between self and act. 'Everything, finally, hangs on the possibility of separating the agent from the action' (Ricœur 2004: 490) through a 'liberating word . . . you are better than your actions' (*ibid*.: 493). Forgiveness is the only way in which the sources of good agency can be reopened. 'Under the sign of forgiveness, the guilty person is to be considered capable of something other than his offenses and his faults' (*ibid*.). He is 'rendered capable of beginning again: this would be the figure of unbinding that commands all the others' (*ibid*.: 490).

However, this liberating act must remain a prerogative that may also not be granted. It belongs to the dignity of the victims that they can choose either course of action. Unlike other types of agency, forgiveness cannot be turned into an institution, as Ricœur insists in his sharp critique of an amnesty sought at the cost of victims in order to establish a superficial truce. Forgiveness remains a gift, and thus reveals something priceless that cannot be converted into calculable equivalence.

By giving a lead role to practical wisdom in its mediating function between universality and singularity, the hermeneutical philosopher shows confidence in the resources from which humans draw to deal with incompatibilities, tensions, and tragic choices. His vision for democracy is one of multiple traditions in search of political authority that can be legitimated within a public sphere of which they are co-founders. Among them are the religious traditions that keep open the thought of an ultimate, gracious Other and the possibility of understanding and leading life as received in an economy of the gift. Dignity can draw from resources that pose a limit to marketability and self-objectification. A final sign for the respect accorded to singularity is the guarantee for radical critics and anarchists to decline participating in this venture shared between 'heterogeneous traditions'. While they seek to convince each other's members that they are creditable and that their resources, 'reinvigorated and driven by their unkept promises', are worthy of consideration, they should concede:

Finally . . . a place has to be reserved for dissensus and for the right to respond to the offer of creditability on the part of any authorities in place by a refusal to grant credit to them. This calculated risk, which should be recognized as having a supporting marginal role, is, after all, part of the very idea of 'credit', of accrediting. (Ricœur 2007: 105)

#### **References**

- Feinberg, J. 1980. *Rights, Justice, and the Bounds of Liberty: Essays in Social Philosophy*. Princeton University Press
- Kant, I. 1964. *Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals*, trans. H. J. Paton. New York: Harper
- Mandry, C. 2002. *Ethische Identit¨at und christlicher Glaube: Theologische Ethik im Spannungsfeld von Theologie und Philosophie*. Mainz: Grunewald ¨
- Ricœur, P. 1992. *Oneself as Another*, trans. K. Blamey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
	- 1995. 'Love and Justice', in *Figuring the Sacred: Religion, Narrative and Imagination*, trans. D. Pellauer, ed. M. Wallace. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress, 315–29
	- 1996. 'The Erosion of Tolerance and the Resistance of the Intolerable', in P. Ricœur (ed.), *Tolerance Between Intolerance and the Intolerable*. Oxford: Berghahn, 189–201
	- 2002. 'Ethics and Human Capability: A Response', in J. Wall, W. Schweiker and D. Hall (eds.), *Paul Ricœur and Contemporary Moral Thought*. London, New York: Routledge, 279–90
	- 2004. *Memory, History, Forgetting*, trans. K. Blamey and D. Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
	- 2005. *The Course of Recognition*, trans. D. Pellauer. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
	- 2006. 'Capabilities and Rights', in S. Deneulin, M. Nebel and N. Sagovsky (eds.), *Transforming Unjust Structures: The Capability Approach*. Dordrecht: Springer, 17– 26
	- 2007. *Reflections on the Just*, trans. D. Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press