

---

### Dignity in the ubuntu tradition 

THADDEUS METZ

What the '*ubuntu* tradition' in the title of this chapter refers to is the conception of how one ought to live that was prominent among pre-colonial societies below the Sahara desert and that continues to inform much moral reflection among black Africans in the region. '*Ubuntu*' literally means humanness or personhood among speakers of Zulu, Xhosa and Ndebele in southern Africa, and it has cognates in many other African languages, for example '*botho*' in Sotho-Tswana, '*hunhu*' in Shona and '*utu*' in Swahili (Broodryk 2002: 14, 31). The term '*ubuntu*' is often used to concisely sum up a particular view of what is morally fundamental, roughly, to live a genuinely human way of life or to become a real person.

As one would expect of a large and diverse region such as sub-Saharan Africa, conceptions of what (genuine) humanness or (real) personhood consists of are far from uniform. Nonetheless, there are certain ideas associated with talk of '*ubuntu*' and related terms that one encounters recurrently, and they are what I focus on here, particularly insofar as they bear on the value of dignity as the ground of human rights articulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948.

I treat the *ubuntu* tradition philosophically and not anthropologically, meaning that my primary aim is not to *reflect*in detail the beliefs of a particular African people or group of them. I draw on ideas commonly advocated by adherents to *ubuntu* in order to spell out and sometimes *construct* understandings of human dignity that are worth taking seriously by professional ethicists, moral philosophers, jurisprudential scholars and constitutional courts anywhere in the world today. In particular, I seek to articulate a theory of dignity grounded on sub-Saharan values that could serve as a genuine rival to the influential Kantian conception that currently dominates most intellectual reflection on the topic.

#### **The morality of ubuntu**

A large swathe of sub-Saharan thinking about ethics is summed up with phrases usually translated as 'a person is a person through other persons' or 'I am because we are'. These are overly literal renditions that convey little to English speakers unfamiliar with sub-Saharan worldviews. All they connote, on the face of it, are sociological claims about individuals always being part of a society or children needing adults in order to survive. In fact, they are also often meant to convey a certain moral ideal.

Implicit in the claim that a person is a person through other persons is the judgment that one ought to develop one's personhood or humanness, where these come in degrees. From a scientific or descriptive standpoint, anyone who is self-aware and reflective in certain ways counts as a person, and any individual that is a member of *Homo sapiens* is a human being. However, when thinking normatively, terms such as 'personhood', 'humanness' and the like in the *ubuntu* tradition refer to finally *valuable* aspects of our nature, *virtues* that can be exhibited to a greater or lesser extent. One's basic aim as a moral agent should be to become a *complete* person or to live a *truly* human life.

Contemporary philosophers would name this kind of perspective a 'selfrealization' or '*eudaemonist*' ethic, according to which one's fundamental goal should be to develop the facets of one's human nature that are good for their own sake. Failure to do so would mean that one is living an 'inhuman' life or is 'not a person', and, indeed, sub-Saharans often call those who particularly fail to manifest *ubuntu* 'animals' (Pearce 1990: 147; Bhengu 1996: 27). Of course, these pejorative labels are meant metaphorically; it is not as though one who lacks virtue is literally no longer a human being. Rather, he is simply not a *real* human being, in the way that a jalopy is not a real car, for failing to function as it should (Gaie 2007: 33).

So far, I have discussed the first half of the maxim that sums up an *ubuntu* ethic, 'a person is a person through other persons'; the claim that a person is a person is a prescription to develop one's personhood. It is the second half of the phrase, about how to do so, where considerations of dignity arise. The way in which one becomes a real person is 'through other persons', and this, in much African thinking, means through a communal relationship with others. As Augustine Shutte, a South African who was one of the first professional philosophers to publish a book on *ubuntu*, sums up the basics of the ethic: 'Our deepest moral obligation is to become more fully human. And this means entering more and more deeply into community with others. So although the goal is personal fulfilment, selfishness is excluded' (Shutte 2001:30). Who are the 'others' with whom we are to commune in order to exhibit *ubuntu*? The answers to this question are *prima facie* attractive conceptions of human dignity: one obtains humanness or virtue by prizing communal relationship with the most important beings in the world.

#### **Three sub-Saharan conceptions of dignity**

For beings to have dignity is basically for each of them to be objectively good for their own sake to an equally superlative degree that entitles them to respectful treatment (Metz 2012: 20–1). In other words, beings with dignity have the highest non-instrumental value such that they must be treated as having *that* kind of value. If a being has dignity, then one morally must treat it neither as though it has a merely instrumental value, i.e. merely as a means, nor as though it has less value than another such being.

These ideas are familiar from the Western, and specifically Kantian, moral tradition, according to which persons have a dignity in virtue of autonomy, and human rights violations are serious forms of disrespect for this capacity. When referring to this perspective in what follows, I do not have in mind Immanuel Kant's own ideas, but rather views typical of theorists inspired by him, such as John Rawls, Ronald Dworkin and Onora O'Neill. Unlike Kant himself, they tend to think of autonomy as an ability to deliberate and decide that is part of the natural world, but that makes us higher than animals, which lack it. For these thinkers, treating an individual as dignified because she has that ability means according her equal rights to choose for herself. Negative human rights violations such as authoritarianism, slavery and torture are conceived as interference with self-governance, whereas positive human rights violations, such as not fighting poverty, are often thought of as failures to enhance people's ability to choose their own ways of life.

The Kantian idea of self-determination as the source of our dignity and the ground of human rights is currently the most influential conception, at least in the West and often in international human rights documents. In what follows, I discuss three sub-Saharan conceptions of dignity, in search of one that provides serious reason to question whether the Kantian view is most justified.

#### **Spiritual nature**

Here is one account of with whom to commune in order to develop *ubuntu* that is standard among pre-colonial sub-Saharan societies and also accepted by several contemporary African philosophers: beings with a certain *supernatural essence*. God and ancestors, persons who are alive but not visible, are relevant others with whom to enter into community, as are human beings because they have a spiritual nature that has its source in God. African texts that address human rights often suggest that it is in virtue of having a 'divine spark' that human beings have a dignity of a sort that is capable of grounding human rights (for example, Wiredu 1996: 157–71; Ramose 1999: 49–64, 138–45, 163–95; Ilesanmi 2001; Deng 2004: 501). Since human beings have something akin to a soul, an immaterial substance that will survive the death of their body, they are the most special things on the planet and hence deserve respect in the form of universal entitlements to life, liberties, resources and the like.

Although appeal to a spiritual element is the most common idea of what grounds human dignity in African thought, I do not think it is promising. For one, there are notorious philosophical difficulties in seeking to ground values on supernatural properties. For another, an appeal to the spiritual is unlikely to entail or well explain certain human rights. Infringements of core rights do not seem to consist fundamentally of degradations of an individual's *soul* or other spiritual property. Nor do they all even appear necessarily to be degrading of the body as what houses the soul.

It would be much more philosophically appealing to ground such rights on a Kantian view of dignity as inhering in our capacity to make voluntary or reasoned decisions. Dictatorship, segregation and slavery are more plausibly understood to be degradations of people's autonomy than of their soul or the like. I therefore suggest moving on to critically explore some other sub-Saharan conceptions of dignity, in order to find one that can truly compete with the Kantian one.

#### **Liveliness**

The *ubuntu* tradition occasions awareness of two other ways to conceive human dignity, i.e. two additional conceptions of the most special beings with whom to commune so as to realize one's humanness. One of them appeals to a certain understanding of human life as being more important than anything in the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdoms insofar as it has a greater capacity for 'life-force'.

Among many traditional African societies, the universe is understood to consist fundamentally of an invisible, vital energy that has come from God, with rocks having a low degree of it, plants having more than rocks, animals having more than plants, and humans having more than animals. Although the origins of the idea of life-force are thickly metaphysical, the concept can be of use when shorn of the supernatural. That is, one can plausibly understand in purely physical terms what it is for a thing to be intrinsically valuable by virtue of its vital energy, which I call 'liveliness'. African philosophers who prize vitality often characterize it in terms of health, strength, growth, reproduction, generation, creativity, vibrancy, activity, self-motion, courage and confidence, with a lack of life-force being constituted by the presence of disease, weakness, decay, barrenness, destruction, lethargy, passivity, submission, fear, insecurity and depression (Dzobo 1992; Kasenene 1994; Magesa 1997; Iroegbu 2005a; 2005b). Consider the view that those beings with the former, physical properties to a sufficiently great degree have a superlative inner worth, a dignity.

Thinking of substantial liveliness, or the capacity for it, as constitutive of human dignity avoids the problems facing the spiritual conception. The vitality theory entails that we can have dignity in a world that is entirely physical, and it does a plausible job of accounting for the human rights where the spiritual one could not; forced labour, whether by virtue of segregation or enslavement, would inhibit people's liveliness, and, as John Stuart Mill argued long ago, people who participate in democratic governance tend to be more independent, active and self-reliant than those who live under autocratic regimes.

However, the vitality conception of human dignity does face some serious objections (see Metz 2012 for the ideas that follow). One problem is that it is unclear that violating, for instance, the right to informed consent is best understood as a degradation of liveliness. For example, if a physician believed that a given treatment would be most effective for curing a patient, then the latter's consent would be irrelevant from the standpoint of a demand to respect her *vitality*. This would be especially true if the doctor believed that the treatment would be marginally less effective if the patient knew why and how she were being treated.

The at hand reply is that liveliness would be gravely impaired if patients found out that they had not been informed of a given medical intervention. If patients discovered that their physician had not told them of their treatments, they would be less likely to adhere to the required regimen and hence would tend not to become as healthy. Furthermore, patients would feel violated upon discovering the lack of truth-telling on the part of doctors, and such a violation of trust could be expected to reduce a person's exuberance and self-esteem.

The reply appears to misfire, though, in that its logic suggests that what constitutes the violation of the human right would be the *failure to keep secret* the lack of informed consent. Liveliness would be impaired only upon a patient's awareness that medical professionals had not fully informed her of the nature of the intervention; it would not be the lack of informed consent *per se* that would be the culprit. Hence, this rationale oddly entails that a medical practice of deception that is successful, or perhaps likely to be successful, would not be a human rights violation.

For another case of a human right that seems poorly captured by considerations of liveliness, consider one concerning criminal justice. Citizens have a human right not to be punished if they are innocent, or at least if a fair procedure has not judged them guilty (UDHR, Article 11). Even if framing and punishing a person known to be innocent would alone prevent more harm to innocents, say, by convincing a bloodthirsty mob not to riot, it would constitute a human rights violation if a magistrate were to do so. However, it does not appear degrading of a person's *liveliness* as such to treat him so.

One might wonder why not, and reply that punishing an innocent would surely count as a human rights violation since doing so would reduce his vitality. However, such a rationale counter-intuitively forbids the use of *all* punishment and coercion, even when directed against aggressors as needed to save innocents. A similar point applies to the reply that it is degrading to reduce one person's liveliness for the sake of protecting that of others; for those suffering from ethnic cleansing have a right that the state impair the vitality of aggressors when doing so would save that of innocents. Sometimes vitality-impairing coercion is justified, and sometimes it is not.

Obviously, the guilt and innocence of the parties largely determines when the use of punishment and other force is justified, but the liveliness conception does not distinguish fundamentally between aggressors and non-aggressors, who are both alive. Here, again, the Kantian view appears to do better. It is straightforward to maintain that punishing an innocent degrades his capacity for decision-making, whereas punishing a guilty party does not. Treating a person's ability to make decisions as special means responding to the way he has exercised it, such that it need not be degrading of autonomy to reduce one person's autonomy in response to her using it to reduce someone else's. In addition, failure to inform patients of their medical treatment is widely viewed to be a degradation of their capacity for autonomy. The next conception of dignity grounded in sub-Saharan values, I will suggest, provides the strongest challenge to the Kantian one.

#### **Communal relationship**

A third conception of human dignity that has a recognizably African pedigree is the idea that we are more special than rocks, plants and animals in virtue of our capacity for communal relationship. When it is said that a person is a person through other persons, we have seen that this means that one should develop one's personhood or virtue, something one does insofar as one enters into community with others. The relevant others with whom to commune, according to the present theory of dignity, are those who in principle are the*most capable of communing* (Metz 2011, 2012, from which the following paragraphs borrow; for different communitarian views, which focus on membership, often in a spiritual realm, see Cobbah 1987:323–31; Bujo 2001: 88; Cornell 2011:327,331).

What is it, then, to be capable of a communal relationship? Much African thought about the nature of community can be analytically clarified by understanding it as the combination of two logically distinct relationships, *identity* and *solidarity*. Identification is, at the core, a matter of thinking of oneself as a 'we', that is, as a member of a group, and of engaging in joint projects with its members. Exhibiting solidarity is basically a matter of helping others for their sake, often out of sympathetic emotional reaction to what it is like to be them. So stated, these are not one and the same thing. A good example of identity without solidarity is the relationship between workers and management in a capitalist firm; employees think of themselves as members of the same company as employers and coordinate their behaviour with the latter, but do not usually go to work out of sympathy for employers or for their sake. Conversely, one can find a relationship of solidarity without identity when anonymous donations are made to a charity.

Now, the combination of identifying with others, or sharing a way of life with them, on the one hand, and exhibiting solidarity towards them, or caring for their quality of life, on the other, is what most people mean by 'friendship' or a broad sense of 'love' (cf. Tutu 1999: 34–5). So, one way to understand the claim that dignity inheres in our capacity for communal relationship is to say this: we are more special than anything else on the planet because we are capable of being part of a friendly or loving relationship in a way that nothing else is.

Human rights violations, from this perspective, are ways of degrading people's capacity for loving relationship (both to love and be loved), which are often a matter of acting in seriously unloving ways towards them. What genocide, slavery, systematic rape, human trafficking, apartheid and totalitarianism arguably have in common is, in large part, that those who engage in these practices treat people in an extremely unfriendly way, namely, by thinking of others as separate and inferior, greatly undermining others' ability to pursue their own goals, seeking to grossly impair their quality of life, and exhibiting emotions such as *Schadenfreude* as well as motives of power-seeking.

Such an Afro-communitarian conception of dignity as applied to human rights avoids the problems facing the views previously discussed. Unlike the spiritual nature theory, it is secular and intuitively accounts for the human rights not to be subjected to segregated employment, slavery or a dictatorship. These practices are plausibly understood to consist of failures to honour others' communal nature, in part because they are unlikely to be good for others or done out of sympathy with them, but most clearly because they are failures to share a way of life with them, i.e. to enjoy a sense of togetherness and to cooperate.

Furthermore, the communal relationship view appears to be more attractive than the vitality one in that the former can ground human rights that the latter does not underwrite with ease. For a physician not to inform his patient of the treatment she is undergoing is to fail to share a way of life with her, which requires transparency about the terms of their interaction. And the reason it is wrong to punish or otherwise harm an innocent person, even when it would save more innocent lives, is that it fails to treat him in accordance with the way he has exercised his capacity for community. Roughly, if someone has been friendly, then he warrants friendliness in response, whereas if someone has been unfriendly, then he warrants unfriendliness, at least when it would protect the victims of his unfriendliness. That principle explains not only why it is wrong to punish an innocent for the sake of the greater protection of innocents, but also why the state should use violence against aggressors who threaten to harm innocents. It does not treat a person's capacity for friendliness in a degrading way to treat him in an unfriendly way as necessary to counteract his own unfriendliness.

#### **Conclusion: ubuntu and cross-cultural theorization**

For all that has been said in this chapter, the Afro-communitarian theory of human dignity and the Kantian conception appear to be on a par. Both do a fair job of entailing and explaining a wide variety of human rights that we intuitively have. I lack the space to explore which is more defensible, but note that this project is worth undertaking. It is not obvious that human rights violations are fundamentally to be understood as degradations of our autonomous nature, the standard view in the West, as opposed to degradations of our communal nature, in line with the philosophical interpretation of the *ubuntu* tradition.

Defenders of the Kantian conception of dignity take it to be applicable universally, not merely to those in the West, where the view originated. After all, human rights are by definition understood to apply to (nearly) all human beings, and so it is to be expected that a view of dignity, as what grounds human rights, is going to be true of humans wherever they are on the planet. Pluralism with regard to what people *believe* about dignity is consistent with there being a monistic fact about the actual nature of human dignity, or so Kantians think. The Afro-communitarian conception articulated here may be seen as aiming for a similarly universal scope, that is, for the displacement of the Kantian view. Which conception of dignity is likely to gain greater assent across the globe? Even if no actual intercultural consensus were forthcoming, which view could be demonstrated philosophically to cohere with other judgments that are widely accepted, at least by those who have reflected with the most care on moral matters? I hope the reader agrees that such questions merit careful answers.

#### **References**

Bhengu, M. J. 1996. *Ubuntu: The Essence of Democracy*. Cape Town: Novalis Press

- Broodryk, J. 2002. *Ubuntu: Life Lessons from Africa*. Pretoria: Ubuntu School of Philosophy
- Bujo, B. 2001. *Foundations of an African Ethic*, trans. B. McNeil. New York: Crossroad Publishers
- Cobbah, J. 1987. 'African Values and the Human Rights Debate', *Human Rights Quarterly* 9: 309–31
- Cornell, D. 2011. 'A Call for a Nuanced Constitutional Jurisprudence: South Africa, Ubuntu, Dignity, and Reconciliation', in D. Cornell and N. Muvangua (eds.), *Ubuntu and the Law*. New York: Fordham University Press, 324–32
- Deng, F. 2004. 'Human Rights in the African Context', in K. Wiredu (ed.), *A Companion to African Philosophy*. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 499–508
- Dzobo, N. K. 1992. 'Values in a Changing Society', in K. Wiredu and K. Gyekye (eds.), *Person and Community*. Washington, DC: Council for Research in Values and Philosophy, 223–40
- Gaie, J. 2007. 'The Setswana Concept of Botho', in J. Gaie and S. Mmolai (eds.), *The Concept of Botho and HIV/AIDS in Botswana*. Eldoret, Kenya: Zapf Chancery, 29–43
- Ilesanmi, S. 2001. 'Human Rights Discourse in Modern Africa', *Journal of Religious Ethics* 23: 293–322
- Iroegbu, P. 2005a. 'What Is Life?', in P. Iroegbu and A. Echekwube (eds.), *Kpim of Morality Ethics*. Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books, 435–9
	- 2005b. 'Right to Life and the Means to Life: Human Dignity', in P. Iroegbu and A. Echekwube (eds.), *Kpim of Morality Ethics*. Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books, 446–9

- Kasenene, P. 1994. 'Ethics in African Theology', in C. Villa-Vicencio and J. de Gruchy (eds.), *Doing Ethics in Context*. Cape Town: David Philip, 138–47
Magesa, L. 1997. *African Religion*. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books

- Metz, T. 2011. 'Ubuntu as a Moral Theory and Human Rights in South Africa', *African Human Rights Law Journal* 11: 532–59
2012. 'African Conceptions of Human Dignity', *Human Rights Review* 13: 19–37

- Pearce, C. 1990. 'Tsika, Hunhu and the Moral Education of Primary School Children', *Zambezia* 17: 145–60
- Ramose, M. 1999. *African Philosophy Through Ubuntu*. Harare: Mond Publishers
- Shutte, A. 2001. *Ubuntu: An Ethic for the New South Africa*. Cape Town: Cluster Publications
- Tutu, D. 1999. *No Future Without Forgiveness*. New York: Random House
- Wiredu, K. 1996. *Cultural Universals and Particulars: An African Perspective*. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press