

---

### Posthuman dignity

MARTIN G. WEISS

The notion of 'posthuman dignity' first appeared in a paper entitled 'In Defense of Posthuman Dignity', which Nick Bostrom published in 2005 in the Journal *Bioethics*. In this paper, he stresses that neither means nor ends of enhancement technologies advocated by the exponents of the transhumanist or posthumanist movement endanger human dignity or the fundamental human rights derived from it (Bostrom 2005).

As the concept of 'human dignity' as well as that of 'enhancement' are controversial and the answer to the question of whether radically enhancing human nature violates human dignity depends on the definition of these two notions, in the following I will try to clarify these key concepts in the context of the enhancement debate. Whereas the notion of enhancement is relatively well defined by its proponents, the different argumentations put forward to explain human dignity will lead us to the question of human nature and its moral status.

In the context of posthumanism and transhumanism, the notions 'nature' and 'human nature' are crucial, as posthumanism and transhumanism challenge both meanings of nature, i.e. 'biology' as well as 'essence', by questioning the relation between human nature in the sense of essence and human nature in the sense of the biology of the human being. Is human nature (its biology) a normative boundary, which one has to preserve in order not to harm human dignity? Or is the will to transform the nature of humans (their biology) a genuine expression of the very essence of man and therefore of his constitutive freedom, which again is the fundament of human dignity.

The first section of this chapter deals with the basic concept of posthumanism, i.e. its notion of enhancement, and very briefly with its links to Renaissance Humanism and the Enlightenment.

The following sections discuss three different accounts of human dignity put forward in the debate on the ethical permissibility of human enhancement, in order to explore their compatibility with posthumanism. Whereas personism conceives human dignity as an absolute concept – meaning that there are no grades of personhood – and therefore concludes that enhancement has no impact on human dignity as long as it does not compromise personhood, naturalistic conceptions of human dignity, which identify dignity with a given natural feature of the person – its 'genetic asset' (Fukuyama), 'natural origin' (Habermas) or 'openness to the unbidden' (Sandel) – condemn enhancement technologies as hubristic manipulation of human nature.

As this naturalistic critique of posthumanism re-echoes the well-known religious argument which stresses that enhancing technologies equal to 'playing god', the penultimate section deals with the theological notion of 'Co-Creation', i.e. with the idea that enhancing technologies may not be a form of hubristic manipulation, but the expression of man's likeness of God.

Finally, the conclusion suggests that posthumanism implies an unspoken mind–body dualism, because the enhancement of human nature/biology can be conceived as liberation only if there is something which needs to be liberated from nature/biology: free subjectivity (i.e. human nature/essence). Paradoxically, this dualism, which is at the origin of enhancement technologies, is foiled by these very technologies, because the alleged liberation of the subject through domination of its nature/biology, leads to the deeper insight that the subject is caught in its body, i.e. *is* its body.

#### **What is posthumanism?**

In the words of Nick Bostrom, Director of the Future of Humanities Institute at the University of Oxford:

Transhumanism is a loosely defined movement that has developed gradually over the past two decades, and can be viewed as an outgrowth of secular humanism and the Enlightenment. It holds that current human nature is improvable through the use of applied science and other rational methods, which may make it possible to increase human health-span, extend our intellectual and physical capacities, and give us increased control over our own mental states and moods.

(Bostrom 2005: 203)

As Bostrom himself stresses in this passage, the core concept of 'posthumanism' dates back to Renaissance humanism and the ideals of the Enlightenment. In his *Oration on the Dignity Of Men*, a sort of humanist manifesto published in 1486, the Italian philosopher Pico della Mirandola wrote:

The Great Artisan . . . made man a creature of indeterminate and indifferent nature, and, placing him in the middle of the world, said to him 'Adam, we give you no fixed place to live, no form that is peculiar to you, nor any function that is yours alone. According to your desires and judgment, you will have and possess whatever place to live, whatever form, and whatever functions you yourself choose. All other things have a limited and fixed nature prescribed and bounded by our laws. You, with no limit or no bound, may choose for yourself the limits and bounds of your nature . . . '. (Pico della Mirandola 1990: 4)

This 'humanistic' approach defines man, as Immanuel Kant puts it, as '*animal rationabile*', that is: as an animal that is able to 'achieve' humanity.

In Kant, the main figure of eighteenth-century enlightenment, the transformation of the human animal into man, which is the history of civilization, is conceived as 'emancipation' from nature. Humanity here is identified with rationality as the result of the emancipation from nature, which moreover is largely identified with the body.

Until recently, despite all efforts at educating humankind and controlling their souls and bodies, no one really questioned the stability of humanity's biological basis. Until the rise of pharmacology, genetics and prosthetics, human nature was thought to be unchangeable. To speak of something's nature meant to speak of its eternal given essence. Now this last line of objectivity is gone. Humans have definitively lost their essence. Since the work of Sigmund Freud at the latest, we are aware of the fact that our soul and subjectivity are nothing we can rely on; due to the astonishing achievements of biotechnologies, we are also forced to accept that nothing is given in our biological nature and objectivity. There is no natural boundary for what humans can be, no intrinsic essence of humanity, neither in the human soul nor in human biology. Thus, biotechnology carries the promise of finally transforming the human animal into the free being the Renaissance dreamed about. To reach this goal, posthumanism advocates the enhancement of three human 'central capacities':

- (1) *healthspan*: the capacity to remain fully healthy, active, and productive, both mentally and physically;
- (2) *cognition*: general intellectual capacities, such as memory, deductive and analogical reasoning, and attention, as well as special faculties such as the capacity to understand and appreciate music, humour, eroticism, narration, spirituality, mathematics, etc.;
- (3) *emotion*: the capacity to enjoy life and to respond with appropriate affect to life situations and other people (Bostrom 2008: 107).

Without going into detail, troubling questions arise, because, whereas the meaning of an enhanced health-span seems sufficiently clear, posing only the question of whether we want to live in a world without 'nativity' (Arendt 1998) and the freshness of the youth – as a society of health-span-enhanced people would have to agree to limit reproduction to a minimum – it seems much more difficult to define what it would mean to enhance cognition, emotion and behaviour. Do we really want to remember everything? What consequences would a generally increased IQ generate? What kind of society would a society of Mr Spocks be, in which everybody has complete control over his impulses and moods? And, finally, what would an enhancement of our spirituality consist of?

Bioethicists inclined towards posthumanism and liberalisms deem the improvement of these central characteristics of the human being as desirable. These features represent in their view not 'positional goods' – 'whose goodness for those possessing them depends on other subjects not possessing them' (Bostrom and Savulescu 2009: 11) – but all-purpose-remedies, which do not prejudice individual choices of good life, but empower the subject to realize his own version of good life.

Hence, although it may be good for posthumans to be posthuman, the question we have to answer first is whether it is good for us to become posthuman, as it is us who have to decide whether we want to embrace enhancement technology or ban it. In his paper, 'Why I Want To Be a Posthuman When I Grow Up' (Bostrom 2008), Nick Bostrom tries to argue that posthuman values are actually human values and that we have some sort of moral obligation to become posthumans, but as humans. Bostrom maintains that enhancement is a dispositional good. A good that we can anticipate, that we would value if we were perfectly acquainted with it. 'The claim is that for *most* current human beings, there are possible posthuman modes of being such that it could be good for these humans to become posthuman in one of those ways' (Bostrom 2008: 108). In the words of Nicholas Agar: 'Consider a music lover who has never listened to Bach's B-minor Mass. The Mass may be among his musical values if it were the case that he would enjoy it were he to be acquainted with it. The dispositional account enables Bostrom to say that posthuman values that seem beyond our comprehension may nevertheless fall within the ambit of our current dispositions' (Agar 2007: 15). Against Bostrom's attempt to demonstrate that posthuman values are human values, Agar stresses the importance of 'local values': 'Local values are high on the list of those that contribute meaning to our lives . . . You wouldn't swap your child for another child, even if that child were manifestly smarter and better at sport . . . I value humanity because I'm human. I wouldn't trade my humanity for posthumanity even though I recognize that posthumans are objectively superior' (Agar 2007: 16). According to Agar, even if we accept that posthuman values are dispositional goods, this does not imply any moral obligation to embrace enhancement. Whereas Agar thus sees no obligation to become posthuman, George Annas, one of the most outspoken opponents of posthumanism – famous for his equation of enhancement technologies with 'weapons of mass destruction' (Annas 2000: 773) – is much more sceptical. Annas even launched a campaign for an international convention to ban posthumanist 'species alteration', as this may endanger human nature and dignity:

There are limits to how far we can go in changing our human nature without changing our humanity and our basic human values. Because it is the meaning of humanness (our distinctness from other animals) that has given birth to our concepts of both human dignity and human rights, altering our nature necessarily threatens to undermine both human dignity and human rights. With their loss, the fundamental belief in human equality would also be lost.

> (Annas 2000: 773) 1

#### **Enhancement and human dignity**

The concepts of human nature and human dignity, emphasized by Annas and other 'Bioconservatives', as Bostrom labels them, are fundamental to the debate on enhancement.

Although human dignity is a very controversial concept (Resnik 2007), it plays a key role in debates on bioethics and is adduced as the basis of several important legal treatises and conventions. Among the numerous interpretations of 'human dignity' put forward, three have been most influential: the Kantian, the naturalistic and the religious (Judeo-Christian).

All three approaches to human dignity mentioned share the notion of human dignity as an expression of the exceptional moral value of the human being, forming the basis for its undeniable rights:

Human dignity is the idea that human beings have inherent moral value or worth. The 18th century German philosopher Immanuel Kant, who has developed the most influential view of human dignity, distinguished between two types of things in the world: things with a price and things with a dignity. Things that have dignity have a moral value that cannot be measured in terms of a price . . . According to Kant, dignity entails special treatment: one should not treat humanity (whether in one's own self or in another person) as having only an instrumental (market) value but always as having inherent, moral worth . . . Moral duties towards human beings imply moral rights: human beings have rights to life, liberty, property, due process and so on. (Resnik 2007: 215)

For Kant, the basis of human dignity is human autonomy. It is important, however, to underline that by autonomy Kant does not mean arbitrariness of individual decisions, but the insight into the natural laws of morality given with rationality. The subject of dignity, the 'person' in Kant's terminology, is autonomous insofar as she finds in herself ('*autos*') the norm of morality ('*nomos*') as a given 'fact of reason'. However, the feature of personal autonomy in the sense of free choice or freedom according to Kant can be indirectly deduced (albeit only as a regulative principle) from human morality, because the appeal expressed by the categorical imperative makes sense only under the condition that the moral subject is actually free. But what is more important in our context is the track record of Kant's concept of personhood, largely accepted as the dominant explanation for the exceptional moral status of human beings 'in terms of their capacity for self-consciousness and rationality' (Savulescu 2009: 215).

#### **Personism**

Michael Tooley and Peter Singer are the most famous or infamous proponents of personism. They argue that what matters morally is not being a member of the species *homo sapiens*, but some property of human beings – rationality and self-consciousness – which characterizes us as persons: 'It is wrong to kill persons because they can conceive existence into the future. Non-persons do not have such preferences. It is the frustration of these preferences that is wrong. Being human [in contrast to being a person] is merely having the property of being able to interbreed or having a certain chromosomal structure. These facts are not in themselves of normative significance' (Savulescu 2009: 221). What the naturalistic approach instead maintains will be discussed in more detail below.

In the context of the enhancement debate, a personist position is held by Allen Buchanan. He claims that human dignity refers not to the biological species but to the moral status of the person, as personhood in his view represents a 'threshold concept' and not a 'scalar one', so that once *homo sapiens* has acquired the features of personhood (namely, self-consciousness and rationality), to boost these traits would not augment the moral status of the enhanced person.

Although posthuman persons could thus not claim a higher moral status than human persons, Buchanan warns of the danger that non-enhanced persons might have to face serious constrictions of their rights: 'Given the history and persistence of racism, there is a serious risk that the enhanced would treat the unenhanced as if they had a lower moral status, even if they do not. Even if enhancements did not create beings with a higher moral status, or a mistaken perception of unequal moral statuses, this might result in a conflict of legitimate interest between the enhanced and the unenhanced, and a just accommodation of these conflicting interests might involve restrictions of some of the rights of the unenhanced' (Buchanan 2009: 350), similar to the restrictions now in place for the seriously mentally disabled.

#### **Naturalism**

Whereas the exponents of a personalistic approach to human dignity thus do not reject enhancement in principle but express doubts concerning the possible legal consequences for the unenhanced, the proponents of the naturalistic model of human dignity try to maintain the concept of human nature as some sort of unchangeable norm, although the arguments often differ considerably. Whereas Francis Fukuyama's position, for instance, is openly naturalistic, Jurgen Habermas' criticism of liberal eugenics focuses more on the conse- ¨ quences that manipulating the human genome may create on the social level.

Fukuyama's naturalistic approach is revealed in his definition of human nature. In *Our Posthuman Future*, he states, 'human nature is the sum of the behaviour and characteristics that are typical of the human species, arising from genetic rather than environmental factors' (Fukuyama 2002: 130).

Fukuyama identifies human nature with the specific genetic assets that determine our interaction with the environment, especially our emotional reactions. This pattern of emotional response encoded in the genome of the human species and transmitted from generation to generation represents for Fukuyama a sort of safe haven, as on his view our emotional reactions are the common ground of human behaviour and therefore the basis of all social interaction. According to Fukuyama, emotion – and not reason – is the ground of social interaction and politics. Emotions rather than arguments guarantee the peaceful co-existence between humans, or at least between members of the same ethnic group to which one feels viscerally attached 'by nature'. Interference in this relatively well-functioning system of instinctive behaviour could lead to disastrous consequences. Strangely enough, for Fukuyama the possible victory of the mind over the body, represented by biotechnologies, carries a risk of ending in a situation of general violence, a violence that today is restrained because of our inherited instincts.

A second problematic outcome of genetic enhancement picked up by Fukuyama is the danger that it allegedly poses to democracy, as it threatens to undermine the basic equality of humans. Fukuyama fears that the genetically modified 'will look, think, act, and perhaps even feel differently from those who were not similarly chosen, and may come in time to think of themselves as different kinds of creatures' (Fukuyama 2002: 157).

Jurgen Habermas, the elder statesman of German philosophy and last heir ¨ of the Frankfurt School, shares this fear. For him, the great difference between genetic inequality and all other possible inequalities (economic, social and political) between people is, that, in contrast to all of these traditional inequalities, genetic inequality is not reversible. Whereas all social and political differences are contingent – because at least in theory the relationship between master and slave can be reversed – the relationship between the 'enhanced' and the 'naturals' is irreversible. For Habermas, the problem with liberal eugenics is that it threatens to fix power relations once and for all.

A second problematic consequence of genetic enhancements in Habermas' focus concerns the image that genetically modified people may have of themselves. According to Habermas, a genetically modified person who is aware of her condition, would no longer be capable of seeing herself as solely responsible for her actions, as she would always have in mind that perhaps she acts the way she does only because someone else made her that way. According to this argument, a genetically modified person would be incapable of conceiving of herself as an autonomous subject and therefore also as someone capable of making responsible decisions. From this, Habermas concludes that with any but a natural origin – the German word Habermas uses is '*Naturw¨uchsigkeit*' – no person would be able to conceive of herself as an equal and autonomous individual. Thus, according to him, biotechnologies risk undermining the two most important pillars of liberal democracy: equality and autonomy. According to Habermas, a manipulated individual who becomes aware of the aims her parents pursued with her creation will lose the capacity to see herself as an autonomous and equal individual: 'We cannot rule out that knowledge of one's own hereditary features as programmed may prove to restrict the choice of an individual's life, and to undermine the essentially symmetric relations between free and equal human beings' (Habermas 2003: 23).

As liberal democracy is possible only as an association of autonomous and, at least theoretically, equal citizens, germline interventions, according to Habermas, therefore endanger the very foundations of our liberal democracies.

Similar to Habermas, Michael Sandel also fears that enhancement technologies 'may cause . . . loss of openness to the unbidden' (Bostrom and Savulescu 2009: 6). And, like Habermas, Sandel also stresses that the liberal approach to enhancement, expressed by Nozick's famous plea for a 'genetic supermarket' (Nozick 1974) is not essentially different from the old fashioned state-organized eugenics: 'What, after all, is the moral difference between designing children according to an explicit eugenic purpose and designing children according to the diktats of the market?' (Sandel 2009: 85).

But the most interesting point in Sandel's criticism of human enhancement perhaps consists in his thoughts about the possible consequences that it may have for the notions of personal responsibility and solidarity:

If bioengineering made the myth of the 'self-made man' come true, it would be difficult to view our talents as gifts for which we are indebted, rather than as achievements for which we are responsible. This would transform three key features or our moral landscape: humility, responsibility, and solidarity . . . Suppose genetic testing advanced to the point where it could reliably predict each person's medical future and life expectancy . . . The solidarity of insurance would disappear as those with good genes fled the actuarial company of those with bad genes . . . A lively sense of the contingency of our gifts – a consciousness that none of us is wholly responsible for his or her success – saves a meritocratic society from sliding into the smug assumption that the rich are rich because they are more deserving than the poor. (Sandel 2009: 86)

Sandel's preoccupations are shared by Eric T. Juengst, who stresses that the dangers of the new technologies lie not in the alleged manipulation of human nature, but in their amplification of pre-existing social divides:

It is the social perception of genetic difference, not the actual biological differences that fuel human rights abuses . . . To the extent that this wave of post-genomic work accentuates perceived genetic differences between human groups already socially sorted by their mutual power relations (like the 'races'), it will feed draconian 'public health' infringements on reproductive freedoms, oppressive DNA identification and data banking programs, neo-eugenic immigration policies, economic discrimination practices, and at the extreme, biological warfare strategies. (Juengst 2009: 56)

Habermas, Annas, Buchanan, Fukuyama, Sandel and Juengst, alarmed most of all by the possibly disruptive social consequences of enhancement, argue for a ban on enhancement technologies and advocate abstaining from enhancing human nature and from forgetting that, once we have the possibility to intervene in the natural lottery of genes, there is no way to escape responsibility. But, even if we decide not to manipulate our genome, we have to actively make this decision (Bayertz 1994). Once technology confronts us with the possibility of enhancing our biological features, we have lost our innocence one way or another, as we are responsible for acting in the same way that we are responsible for abstaining from acting: 'Could not a child who later became interested in a musical career, but had only the modest talents of its parents, complain that they had opted for the natural outcome and rejected it. In context, letting nature take its course is no longer a neutral response' (Coady 2009: 175).

#### **Co-creation**

Against the objections put forward by the so-called 'Bioconservatives', the 'progressive techno-euphoric' position embraces enhancement as ultimate liberation and emancipation from the biological boundaries that obstruct human freedom, which for this position is the very essence of man. On this view, the human animal represents only a transitory stage in the evolutionary history of this species, which has not yet come to an end. The human animal is not yet what it has to be, but must achieve its very essence by enhancing its proper nature.

However, in this respect, posthumanism is, as we have already seen, no different from classical humanism, which identifies man as the animal whose specific essence consists in not having a given essence at all. Man is the only being that is not what it is, but, since essentially free, has to decide for itself what to be. According to Stock, Director of the Program on Medicine, Technology and Society at the School of Medicine of the University of California in Los Angeles, if humanity is not actively pursuing the goal of genetic enhancement, the possibility will come forward as a side-effect of already widely accepted therapeutic practices: 'The fundamental discoveries that spawn these coming capabilities will flow from research deeply embedded in the mainstream, research that is highly beneficial, enjoys widespread support, and certainly is not directed toward a goal like human germline engineering. The possibilities of human redesign will arrive whether or not we actively pursue them' (Stock 2003: 40).

In agreement with Kurt Bayertz (1994), Stock points out that the very concept of a given natural nature, with which man ought not to interfere, is quite problematic, as it is based on the assumption that man himself is not part of nature. This distinction between the realm of nature (*physis*) where things develop on their own on the one hand, and man and his technical products (*techn`e*) on the other, dates back to Aristotle. In the latter's work, the term nature is used to designate the realm of life, the realm of the beings, which have the principle of their motion within themselves (keep in mind that Aristotle's concept of motion includes local movement as well as becoming and dying). Christianity takes on the Aristotelian distinction between *physis* and *techn`e*, with the difference that nature is then conceived as God's creation, seen in contrast to man and his products (technology), since, after the Fall of Man, humanity in a certain sense was no longer part of the created universe.

But there is also a different interpretation of the relationship between man and nature. The concept of being created in the image of God is generally connected with the idea that man shares with God the features of personhood and freedom which again are central to human dignity. But man, created in the image of God, has a relationship not only to the divine but also to nature. In the history of the three great monotheistic traditions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam), the relationship of man to nature has taken three main forms: domination, stewardship, and co-creation (Coady 2009), of which the latter is of particular interest in the context of the enhancement debate. Thus, for Eric Parens, 'according to Genesis, and it seems to me much of Judaism, our responsibility is not merely to be grateful and remember that we are not the creator of the whole. It is also our responsibility to use our creativity to mend and transform ourselves and the world. As far as I can tell, Genesis and Judaism do not exhort us to choose between gratitude and creativity' (Parens 2009: 189).

The idea of human co-creation, well known in Christianity (Rahner 1970), is especially important in Judaism. Here, man is seen as being as natural as everything else and therefore a fundamental part of creation. And, if man is part of created nature, his products are as well. Rabbi Barry Freundel, a consultant with the United States Presidential Commission on Cloning, states: 'If G-d has built the capacity for gene redesign into nature, than He chose for it to be available to us, and our test remains whether we will use that power wisely or poorly' (Freundel 2000: 119). Here, the idea that man is the image of God results in the conception that man, as poor as he is, has to be creative himself (Prainsack 2006).

I do not find [human beings gaining control of their own evolution] to be any more troubling than discussing any other human capacity to alter the natural world. I take this position as a result of Judaism's teaching that human beings are the most important part of G-d's created universe . . . G-d has entrusted this world to humankind's hands, and the destiny of this world has always been our responsibility and our challenge. Whether or not we live up to that challenge is our calling and essential mission. (Freundel 2000: 119)

Secularizing the Judaic vision of the God–nature–man relationship, which essentially means eliminating the notion of God, Stock states: 'To some, the coming of human-directed change is unnatural because it differs so much from any previous change, but this distinction between the natural and the unnatural is an illusion. We are as natural a part of the world as anything else is, and so is the technology we create . . . Remaking ourselves is the ultimate expression and realization of our humanity' (Stock 2003: 197).

Hence, whereas the conservative faction tries to save a normative concept of nature, thereby risking to fall into the naturalistic fallacy that deduces norms from facts, the posthumanist – or genuinely humanist – position forgets the constitutive contingency of the human being, as this position is latently based on the idea that the human body is only the accidental substratum of the essentially free spiritual subject. This is because, if one thinks that the free subject is something different from his physical incarnation, it is possible to identify control over the body with liberation of the subject. Therefore, underlying the humanist/posthumanist position is an unconscious dualism of mind and body.

But who is this subject that gains control not only over its physical body, but even over its mental states? It is clear that Bostrom thinks of the human subject as something not only immaterial but beyond mental states. Bostrom's subject, which uses (bio)technology to liberate itself from outer and inner nature, is pure freedom, a very difficult notion to grasp.

#### **Conclusion**

The short analysis I have tried to give in the previous pages has shown that both the technophobic rejection of biotechnology and the techno-euphoric embracing of new technology are problematic. The first because it tries to maintain a normative concept of human nature comprehensible only on the grounds of extensive naturalistic presuppositions; the other because, standing in the tradition of the Enlightenment, is therefore subject to the 'dialectic of Enlightenment' described by Adorno and Horkheimer: what started as liberation from the boundaries of man's biological nature turns into reification of the entire human being (Adorno and Horkheimer 2002). In the words of Hans Jonas: 'technologically mastered nature now again includes man, who (up to now) had, in technology, set himself against it as its master' (Jonas 1985: 168).

So the pretended liberation from nature risks ending in a new form of manipulability, as the alleged liberation of the subject from its corporeal limitations finally threatens to create a new sort of oppression of man. He thus tragically learns that the body is not the grave of the soul (to quote Plato), but the only mode in which the mind exists.

The effort of biotechnology to manipulate human nature, which represents the acme of reification, thus paradoxically leads to the insight that this ultimate reification, which aims at total control of the objective nature by the human subject, is not possible. This is because the alleged liberation of the subject by means of the domination of nature (the classical programme of the Enlightenment according to Adorno and Horkheimer) shows that in biotechnology it is not a matter of a subject taking control over a mere body, but rather a human being as a whole being manipulated. The unintentional effect of biotechnology, which is based on the uncritical assumption of a dualistic model of man (defining man as the connection between objective nature and subjective *ratio*), thus consists in the demonstration that this dualistic model is no longer suitable. Having been explored as a consequence of mind–body dualism, biotechnology finally leads us to reach the conclusion that the human being is an indivisible psychosomatic unity.

#### **References**

- Adorno, T. W., and Horkheimer, M. 2002. *Dialectic of Enlightenment*. Stanford University Press
- Agar, N. 2007. 'Whereto Transhumanism? The Literature Reaches a Critical Mass', *Hastings Center Report* 37(3): 12–17
- Annas, G. 2000. 'The Man on the Moon, Immortality and Other Millennial Myths: The Prospects and Perils of Human Genetic Engineering', *Emory Law Journal* 49(3): 753–82
- Arendt, H. 1998. *The Human Condition*. University of Chicago Press
- Bayertz, K. 1994. *GenEthics: Technological Intervention in Human Reproduction as a Philosophical Problem*. Cambridge University Press
- Bostrom, N. 2005. 'In Defense of Posthuman Dignity', *Bioethics* 19(3): 202–14
	- 2008. 'Why I Want To Be a Posthuman When I Grow Up', in B. Gordijn and R. Chadwick (eds.), *Medical Enhancement and Posthumanity*. New York: Springer, 107–37
- Bostrom, N., and Savulescu, J. 2009. 'Human Enhancement Ethics: The State of the Debate' in N. Bostrom and J. Savulescu (eds.), *Human Enhancement*. Oxford University Press, 1–22
- Buchanan, A. 2009. 'Moral Status and Human Enhancement', *Philosophy and Public Affairs* 37(4): 346–81
- Coady, C. A. J. 2009. 'Playing God' in N. Bostrom and J. Savulescu (eds.), *Human Enhancement*. Oxford University Press, 155–81
- Freundel, B. 2000. 'Gene Modification Technology', in G. Stock (ed.), *Engineering the Human Germline: An Exploration of the Science and Ethics of Altering the Genes We Pass to Our Children*. Oxford University Press, 119–22
- Fukuyama, F. 2002. *Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnological Revolution*. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux
- Habermas, J. 2003. *The Future of Human Nature*. Oxford: Blackwell
- Jonas, Hans. 1985. 'Lasst uns einen Menschen klonieren', in H. Jonas, *Technik, Medizin und Ethik*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 162–203
- Juengst, E. T. 2009. 'What's Taxonomy Got to Do with It? Species Integrity", Human Rights, and Science Policy', in N. Bostrom and J. Savulescu (eds.), *Human Enhancement*. Oxford University Press, 43–58
- Kant, I. 1993. *Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals*,3rd edn, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Nozick, R. 1974. *Anarchy, State, and Utopia*. New York: Basic Books
- Parens, E. 2009. 'Toward a More Fruitful Debate About Enhancement', in N. Bostrom and J. Savulescu (eds.), *Human Enhancement*. Oxford University Press, 181–98
- Pico della Mirandola, G. 1990. *De hominis dignitate*. Hamburg: Meiner
- Prainsack, B. 2006. 'Negotiating Life: The Regulation of Human Cloning and Embryonic Stem Cell Research in Israel', *Social Studies of Science* 36(2): 173–205
- Rahner, K. 1970. 'Zum Problem der genetischen Manipulation aus der Sicht des Theologen', in F. Wagner (ed.), *Menschenz¨uchtung: Das Problem der genetischen Manipulierung des Menschen*. Munich: C. H. Beck, 135–66
- Resnik, D. B. 2007. 'Embryonic Stem Cell Patents and Human Dignity', *Health Care Analysis* 15: 211–22
- Sandel, M. J. 2009. 'The Case Against Perfection: What's Wrong with Designer Children, Bionic Athletes, and Genetic Engineering', in N. Bostrom and J. Savulescu (eds.), *Human Enhancement*. Oxford University Press, 71–90
- Savulescu, J. 2009. 'The Human Prejudice and the Moral Status of Enhanced Beings: What Do We Owe the Gods?', in N. Bostrom and J. Savulescu (eds.), *Human Enhancement*. Oxford University Press, 211–50
- Silver, L. M. 1997. *Remaking Eden Cloning and Beyond in a Brave New World*. New York: Avon Books
- Stock, G. (ed.). 2000. *Engineering the Human Germline: An Exploration of the Science and Ethics of Altering the Genes We Pass to Our Children*. Oxford University Press
	- 2003. *Redesigning Humans: Choosing Our Genes, Changing Our Future*. New York: Mariner Books