

---

### Dignity as the right to have rights: human dignity in Hannah Arendt

CHRISTOPH MENKE∗

In recent years, Hannah Arendt has – with increasing frequency – been interpreted as a theorist of human dignity.1 This frequency stands in clear contrast to the fact that Arendt herself only very rarely speaks about the dignity of human beings – in distinction, for example, from the 'dignity of the political' which she investigates and defends in many of her works (Villa 2000). The most prominent of the rare passages in which Arendt does speak of human dignity appears in the foreword to the first edition of *The Origins of Totalitarianism* (1951). Towards the end of this foreword, she writes that:

Antisemitism (and not merely the hatred of Jews), imperialism (not merely conquest), totalitarianism (not merely dictatorship) – one after the other, one more brutally than the other – have demonstrated that human dignity needs a new guarantee which can only be found in a new political principle, in a new law on earth, whose validity this time must comprehend the whole of humanity while its power must remain strictly limited, rooted in and controlled by newly defined territorial entities. (Arendt 1958b: ix)2

Precisely this emphatic formulation, which links the idea of human dignity to the struggle against anti-Semitism, imperialism and totalitarianism, has, however, already 'been dropped' (Arendt 1986: 13) by the 1955 German edition of the book. In the major books that Arendt dedicated to the essence of the political – from *The Human Condition* (1958a) through *On Revolution* (1967) to *Lectures on Kant's Political Philosophy* (1982) – the question of human dignity is only addressed in passing, if indeed at all.

And yet Arendt's appeal to human dignity in the foreword to *The Origins of Totalitarianism* is the expression of a line of thought every bit as central to her understanding of the political as her understanding of the political can be helpful for a clarification of her concept of human dignity. This line of thought is contained in the famous formula from the ninth book of *The Origins of*

<sup>∗</sup> Translated by Birgit Kaiser, Kathrin Thiele and Erica Weitzman.

<sup>1</sup> Especially Isaac 1996, Helis 2008 and Parekh 2008; see also Beiner 1990 and Kateb 2007.

<sup>2</sup> See Birmingham 2006; 2007.

*Totalitarianism* on the 'right to have rights' (Arendt 1958b: 296). The rationale behind Arendt's appeal to human dignity implies that human dignity *consists in* 'a right to have rights (and that means to live in a framework where one is judged by one's actions and opinions) and a right to belong to some kind of organized community' (*ibid*.: 296f). For '[only] the loss of a polity itself expels him [i.e. man] from humanity' (*ibid*.: 297).

This revealing formula, which will be cited far more often than Arendt's cursory appeal to human dignity, is also one that she never used again. The reason for this may be easily understood and is a direct consequence of the specific context in which Arendt introduces the concepts of human dignity and the right to have rights. This context is Arendt's diagnosis of the 'aporia of human rights', in other words her radical critique of the tradition of human rights from the eighteenth to the middle of the twentieth centuries.3 For, if Arendt speaks of human dignity and the right to have rights in *The Origins of Totalitarianism*, she does this not in order to approve the tradition of the idea of human rights, but rather to *reproach* it.4 Since this internal connection between Arendt's appeal to human dignity as the right to have rights and her diagnosis of the aporia of human rights is, however, easy to overlook (and often *is* overlooked), Arendt later abandoned this terminology. This does not mean, however, that she revised the underlying ideas.

Arendt expressed the internal connection between the appeal to human dignity and the critique of human rights most succinctly in a 1949 essay which forms the basis of the famous chapter of *The Origins of Totalitarianism*. This essay is even more interesting in view of the fact that Arendt is writing directly under the influence of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was the first attempt to codify the concept of human dignity *for* the grounding of human rights in an international treaty as a response to the same experience of totalitarianism that Arendt also refers to in her own appeal to human dignity.5 Arendt, however, asserts that the Declaration displays a strong

- 3 'The Aporias of the Rights of Man' ('Die Aporien der Menschenrechte') is the title of the last section of Chapter 9 of *Origins of Totalitarianism* in the German version (Arendt 1986). The English title speaks of 'The Perplexities of the Rights of Man' (Arendt 1958b, 290ff).
- 4 See in this regard Balibar 2007 and Ranciere ` 2004. Opposed to this are interpretations that, for a whole variety of purposes, seek to undo or refute the connection between Arendt's critique of human rights and the counter-concept of the right to have rights: while Benhabib (1996: 193ff) and Cohen (1996) attempt to return Arendt's human rights critique to an anti-universalist thematic (which can then only be overcome through a Kantian reinterpretation of 'the right to have rights'), for Agamben (2000) Arendt's critique of human rights is such a fundamental one that through it the concept of (subjective) rights may be completely repudiated. In this regard, see Menke (2007); in what follows here I use certain formulations and lines of thought taken from this text.
- 5 It is, however, unclear from the text whether Hannah Arendt had access to the final version of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights while writing her essay. Arendt

conceptual confusion, one that 'invariably leads to philosophically absurd and politically unrealistic claims such as that each man is born with the inalienable right to unemployment insurance or an old age pension' (Arendt 1949: 34). For Arendt, this conceptual confusion corresponds to a blatant 'lack of reality' (Arendt 1949: 37), insofar as this latter attempt to reformulate human rights merely repeats, in both spirit and attitude, the traditional declarations which were formulated at the end of the eighteenth century without accounting for the profound crisis that befell the idea of human rights after its failure in the face of totalitarian politics. For Arendt, the tradition of human rights is not the (good) Other *opposed to* a totalitarian politics of exclusion and extermination; rather, the former is connected to the latter in complicated fashion. If this connection is not clarified, no real opposition to totalitarianism can exist. The appeal to human dignity (as the Universal Declaration ambiguously approaches it) is, according to Arendt, not only inadequate as such, it may also be dangerous if it fails to perceive the aporias or perplexities in which the idea of human rights found itself when confronted with a totalitarian politics. Understanding this critique of the tradition of human rights (first subsection below) is thus the precondition for understanding Arendt's concept of human dignity (second subsection below).

#### **Arendt's critique of the tradition of human rights**

In her critique, emphasizing the unrealistic nature of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Arendt takes up the 'English' critique of the 1789 *D´eclaration des droits de l'homme et du citoyen*, i.e. the critique – first formulated by Edmund Burke and extended shortly thereafter by Jeremy Bentham – that human rights are 'an abstraction' (Arendt 1949: 31). When Burke calls the French declaration of human rights 'monstrous' and 'tragicomic' (Burke 1987: 9), or when Bentham calls it 'nonsense upon stilts' (Bentham 1843:523), they mean that 'human rights' are normative demands which relinquish the conditions and forms of the very action they require for their implementation. This action is, namely, political action, or, more precisely, the act of legislation: 'rights' only exist by virtue of legislation. However, laws are only passed for particular political entities, that is, according to modern understanding, for particular (nation) states. Thus, rights 'as such' do not exist, because laws 'as such' do not exist. For Arendt, this double insight – first, that all rights depend upon laws, and, second, that all legislation is inescapably tied to a certain 'locale' – is the essence of Burke's position when he claims to prefer 'the rights of an Englishman' over those of the human being: 'According to Burke, the rights which we enjoy spring "from within the nation", so that neither natural law, nor divine command, nor any concept of mankind, such as Robespierre's "human race, the sovereign of the

speaks of a 'Bill of Rights of the United Nations', and a footnote in the German version refers to the 'drafts of the UN Commission' (Arendt 1949: 35).

earth", are needed as a source of law' (Arendt 1949:31). There are no rights other than those like 'the rights of an Englishman', i.e. rights that derive 'from within the nation'. 'Rights of human beings', therefore, do not exist.

Arendt alludes to the English critique of the French *D´eclaration* for the purpose of interpreting in its light the epochal event of the 'decline of the nation-state' in the first half of the twentieth century, which was in fact nothing less than the 'end of the rights of man'. By 'the decline of the nation-state', Arendt means what was first the erosion, then the complete shattering, of the principle that all inhabitants of a given territory are also citizens of the state that legislates over this territory (for the reason that they are all members of the same people or nation). Such an assumption was made henceforth impossible by the politics of discrimination, expulsion and expatriation in regard to minorities, Jews and refugees in Europe after the First World War. Above all, however, Arendt claims that the 'loss of national rights in all instances entailed the loss of human rights' (Arendt 1949: 31). For Arendt, the central event of the twentieth century is that anyone who ceased to count as the citizen of a particular state not only lost his or her civil rights in that particular state, but also his or her human rights: 'The conception of human rights broke down at the very moment when those who professed to believe in it were for the first time confronted with people who indeed had lost all other qualities and specific relationships, except that they were still human. The world found nothing sacred in the abstract nakedness of being human' (Arendt 1949: 31). This is due to the fact that the 'world' still understood human rights in the tradition of the French Revolution, i.e. in the sense that human rights can only come into being under the auspices of nation-states, and therefore only for these nation-states' respective members. If, however, the nation-state is effectively the only juridical authority that can acknowledge and implement human rights, there can be no human rights for all those who, as a result of expatriation and emigration, cease to belong to any nation-state. The lesson that Arendt draws from the crisis of human rights, however, is precisely the opposite of this conclusion. The link between the rights of man and the rights of the citizen that ultimately led to the loss of human rights with the decline of the nation-state does not reflect a misunderstanding of the true nature of human rights for Arendt; rather, this linkage *is* human rights' true nature.

Arendt bases this claim in the observation that all of the 'so-called Rights of Man' (Arendt 1949: 30) listed by the classical declarations – and they are many and 'of the most heterogeneous nature and origin' (Arendt 1949: 37) – are in fact not concerned with the kind of rights to which each individual human being, simply as human being, is endowed at all. As the first and paradigmatic case of human rights, i.e. freedom of religion, shows, human rights are rather 'formulas which were designed to solve problems *within* given communities' (Arendt 1949: 28). Any declaration of human rights therefore implicitly presupposes that human beings are already members of a community. What the classical declarations call 'human rights' are in fact political principles of legislation within a given community; they thus presuppose the individual's membership of that community. The 'so-called Rights of Man' are a misleading articulation of the rights of each member of a political community and thus of rights which also can *only* pertain to the members of this political community.

For Arendt, there is no way out of this conceptual dilemma (which she therefore describes as 'aporetic') in which rights are bound up with political membership. The traditional declarations of human rights sought a way out by taking recourse to the idea of nature: that is, while human rights in fact deal with problems and establish claims '*within* given communities', declarations of human rights have misrepresented themselves, claiming 'to spell out primary positive rights, inherent in man's nature, as distinguished from his political status, and as such they tried indeed to reduce politics to nature' (Arendt 1967: 104). Through this naturalization, however – which was originally meant to give these rights a concrete basis – the declarations of human rights undermine that which is the very foundation of any juridical political community: the idea of equality. For '[w]e are not born equal, we become equal as members of a group on the strength of our decision to guarantee ourselves mutually equal rights' (Arendt 1949: 33).6 Equality is not an attribute of the natural human being, but rather one of members of a political community; the act of referring to the natural human being will therefore eventually destroy any claim to equal rights. This reversal of the natural grounding of *human* rights into the dissolution of human *rights* is the real explanation for the powerlessness of human rights in the face of totalitarianism's politics of exclusion and extermination which forced their victims to 'live outside the common world'; the victims of totalitarianism were 'thrown back on their natural givenness, on their mere differentiation' (Arendt 1949: 33). Totalitarian politics thus turned their victims into precisely those natural human beings to whom human rights were meant to refer. However, in that same moment it became clear that by being merely natural beings they were no longer potential bearers of rights because they were no longer equals. Or else it became clear that the declarations of human rights, when speaking of natural human beings, were in fact referring to members of political communities. This confusion remained (relatively) harmless for as long as (almost7 ) all human beings were members of a political community in one way or another. But when the world was confronted with masses of nonmembers, this confusion all of a sudden gained terrible significance. At that

6 'Equality . . . is not given to us' (Arendt 1958b: 301); '[n]either equality nor freedom [is] understood as a quality inherent to human nature' (Arendt 1967: 23). For a different reading of Arendt's critique of naturalization, see Agamben 1998, Part III.

- 7 Given that slaves were, in certain respects, still counted as 'a part of the human community' (Arendt 1949: 30), even if Aristotle denied them the capacity of reason, it was the 'savages' of the imperial nineteenth century who were the first 'natural' human beings in whose respect this problem could have arisen (Arendt 1949: 32) – that is, had their existence been taken seriously by the European perspective as a challenge to the concept of human rights.
moment it became evident that the declarations of human rights were unable to counter the overwhelming power of the appearance of the natural human being as something essentially non-equal.

Precisely this is the aporia of human rights: there are only equal rights for political members – and thus these are no *human* rights; and there are only different needs or claims of natural human beings – and thus these cannot lead to human *rights*.

#### **Arendt's concept of dignity**

This 'aporia' of human rights emerges when the decisive question of the rights of those who have been violently turned into non-members is answered by taking recourse to the idea of the natural condition of the human being. Such an answer undermines just what it is meant to establish – the idea of equal rights. These human rights are *in fact* just that – the rights of citizens, of the members of a community. What is most urgently needed by the growing masses of nonmembers; by the expatriated, refugees, stateless persons who neither have nor can find a community, does not appear in the declarations of the 'so-called Rights of Man'.

Arendt's expression for what is needed is the 'right to have rights' (Arendt 1949: 30). The right *to* which non-members must have a right is that of the members of a political community, that is, the right to equality. The right *to have* this right, however, cannot be of the same order as other rights: it is not the right *of* members, but the right *to* membership – 'a right to belong to some kind of organized community' (Arendt 1949: 30). 'We know even better than Burke that rights materialize only within a given political community, that they depend on our fellow-men and on a tacit guarantee that the members of a community give to each other. But we also know that apart from all so-called human rights, which change according to historical and other circumstances, there does exist one right that does not spring "from within the nation" and which needs more than national guarantees: it is the right of every human being to membership in a political community' (Arendt 1949: 34). According to Arendt, this 'right to have rights' is, in distinction to the 'so-called Rights of Man', indeed a human right, namely, *the* ('only') human right, 'the one right without which no other can materialize' (Arendt 1949: 37).

It thus follows from Arendt's demonstration of the aporia of the tradition of human rights that 'it would be a serious error to define this one right, which was never even mentioned among the Rights of Man in the categorical framework of the eighteenth century' (Arendt 1949: 34). Instead, a radical break with that tradition would be required in order to be able to think this one truly human right to have rights. Towards the end of her essay, Arendt suggests two different, even contradictory ways of accomplishing this task.

The first way consists in structurally transforming the human right to have rights into that of a (membership) right within a political community. According to this interpretation, the human right to have rights would belong to the 'sphere of a law that is above the nations' – to international or even cosmopolitan law (Brunkhorst 1999: 93ff; 2002: 19ff). This new international law would be traceable to an act of legislation like any other law: 'This human right, like all other rights, can exist only through mutual agreement and guarantee. Transcending the rights of the citizen – being the right of men to citizenship – this right is the only one that can and can only be guaranteed by the comity of nations' (Arendt 1949: 37). This comity of nations would in turn be based upon a historical development: the 'emergence of mankind as *one* political entity' (Arendt 1949: 36).

This, then, is the first of Arendt's ways out of the aporias of human rights: the human right to have rights would be the fundamental right brought about by an international law – legally binding through 'mutual agreement and guarantee' – which would constitute mankind as a 'political entity'. However, in treating the emergence of mankind qua political entity as a mere historical fact, this solution avoids the crucial question of why such a politically unified humankind *should* exist in the first place. Understanding the right to have rights as the outcome of inter- or supra-national legislation is insufficient to answer this question. Instead, the concept of a right to have rights must provide a reason for the establishment of such legislation.

With this critique, a second way of understanding the right to have rights gains significance. Arendt articulates this alternative understanding with the term 'humanity' (or sometimes 'mankind') using it in a manner different from the two ways that we have thus far encountered, i.e. as the term either for a natural condition or for a historically developed political entity. In this context, Arendt, albeit only in passing, speaks of 'human dignity' (Arendt 1949: 30). Here, 'dignity' refers to what is prior to 'all so-called Rights of Man': 'Man, it turns out, can lose all so-called Rights of Man without losing his essential quality as man, his human dignity. Only the loss of a polity itself expels him from humanity' (Arendt 1949: 30). Arendt thus uses the term 'dignity' (or 'humanity') to designate what would be lost, *beyond* all human rights, with the loss of the status of being a member of a polity and thus with the loss of the right to have rights itself: 'Its loss entails the loss of the relevance of speech (and man, since Aristotle, has been defined as a being commanding the power of speech and thought), and the loss of all human relationship (and man, again since Aristotle, has been called the "political animal", that is, one who by definition lives in a community), the loss, in other words, of some of the most essential characteristics of human life' (Arendt 1949: 30).8

One can discern two argumentative moves made by Arendt which are fundamental for her understanding of the concept of human dignity. First, modern natural law founded rights upon properties which human beings are endowed with by nature: either human beings are thought to be created

<sup>8</sup> Cf. Enders 1977: 501f.

by God, or thought to possess capacities specific to their species, such as reason or pity. These properties form the basis of fundamental claims every human being can make. From these legitimate claims, which pertain to every human being as human being, follow claims which every human being can make with respect to others in the 'social' sphere. Arendt's concept of human dignity, on the other hand, operates in an entirely different manner from that of natural law. With reference to Aristotle, she defines the dignity of human beings by virtue of their being speaking beings, which means for Arendt by virtue of their being political beings. Human dignity is then no natural property with which human beings are individually endowed and that would only subsequently have social consequences. Rather, it consists in nothing other than their politico-linguistic existence: their speaking, judging, and acting as faculties, which they have essentially through, with, and in relation to others.

If, Arendt argues, the politico-linguistic existence of human beings is what constitutes their dignity, this also means attributing to this form of existence a privileged status: politico-linguistic existence is not just one form of life among others, it is the essentially human form. The politico-linguistic existence of human beings is the human *disposition*: 'a general characteristic of the human condition' (Arendt 1949:30). In this first move of Arendt's argument, therefore, her use of the concept of human dignity introduces a definition of human nature that does not take recourse to the idea of the natural human being. Human dignity consists *in* politico-linguistic human existence, because human beings are politico-linguistic 'by nature': they are predetermined to develop a politico-linguistic existence. Each human being's right to membership in a political community is therefore based upon the experience of the significance of politico-linguistic existence for human beings – in other words, it is their right to that form of their existence that is the actual human condition. Or, expressed the other way around: it means that each human being's right to membership in a political community cannot be based upon attributes that are independent from human politico-linguistic existence (and that could in this sense be termed 'natural'). The foundation for each human being's right to membership in a political community cannot be found outside of or below his or her existence within such a community, but rather is located in the experience of the significance of this existence, an experience that is only available within this existence (cf. Birmingham 2006).

Second, Arendt thus no longer refers to the nature of human beings in the sense of a pre-political attribute. By referring to it as the human disposition to political existence, she distances herself from the normative design of modern natural law. Modern natural law traces juridical rights back to natural rights. Both have the same form: that is, they are both subjective rights. Subjective rights are claims by means of which a subject can obligate others. The paradigmatic case in this regard is the right to property: a possession becomes property if it is possible to obligate others to refrain from using the object in question by uttering the words 'this is mine' (or through some equivalent symbolic act). In the juridical sphere, subjective rights are rights bestowed upon the subject. 'Natural' rights, on the contrary, are considered to be non-bestowed subjective rights: while they may function like legal rights (insofar as they confer the capacity to obligate others), one 'possesses' them more or less naturally. We have already seen that Arendt agrees with the 'English' critique, which holds that such non-bestowed subjective rights are 'nonsense upon stilts' (Bentham). The consequence of this is that either the one human right, the 'right to have rights', must also be bestowed – this is the gist of the previously criticized solution to the aporias of human rights, i.e. their being merged with international law – or that, contrary to how it may appear, this one human right cannot be a subjective right (cf. Michelman 1996).

The concept of right must thus have an objective rather than a subjective sense: it no longer defines a claim that human beings are entitled to make, but instead defines what is right *for* them. Understood in a subjective sense, the right to have rights implies that human beings can make a claim to political membership, and are – via law, contract or nature, respectively – entitled to do so. Understood in an objective sense, on the other hand, the right to have rights means that *it is right* for human beings to be members of a political community, in which they – as members – have rights. The objective understanding of the right to have rights *constitutes* the subjective right to political membership, and thereby shows that what grounds subjective rights is not of the same order as these rights themselves (as modern natural law had assumed).9 The claim of each human being to political membership is instead based on the conviction that political membership is the right thing for human beings, emerging out of the understanding of political membership as the (true) human condition.

From the crisis that befell human rights after totalitarianism's politics of exclusion, Arendt draws the conclusion that human rights must be conceived wholly different from the traditional categories of 'natural' rights. That kind of naturalization of rights is in fact an element of the crisis of human rights, if not indeed – *per* Agamben's radicalization of Arendt's critique – complicit with totalitarian politics, and in any case offers no real solution to the crisis of human rights. Arendt's concept of human dignity, on the other hand, *does* offer a solution; albeit one that does not dispute but rather presupposes the insight into the aporias of human rights. It shows that a solution to the crisis of human rights will only be found if the understanding of human rights is transformed entirely, including all its defining elements. The two (more or less implicit) argumentative moves that Arendt is able to make through her use of

<sup>9</sup> 'Before this [i.e. the "deprivation of a place in the world which makes opinions significant and actions effective"], what we must call a "human right" today would have been thought of as a general characteristic of the human condition which no tyrant could take away' (Arendt 1958b: 296f).

the concept of human dignity show the direction that must be taken in order to think the 'one human right' to have rights, beyond the aporias of human rights. The concept of human dignity offers a way out of the crisis of human rights only if, first, it introduces a different anthropology than that of modern natural law – specifically, an anthropology of human life forms as opposed to an anthropology of quasi-natural human 'needs' or 'interests'; and, second, if it understands the foundation of rights differently: by grounding subjective rights in the experience of what is right for human beings.

#### **References**

- Agamben, G. 1998. *Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life*. Stanford University Press 2000. 'Beyond Human Rights', in G. Agamben, *Means Without Ends: Notes on Politics*. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 15–26
Arendt, H. 1949. '"The Rights of Man": What Are They?', *Modern Review* 3(1): 24–36 (German translation: 'Es gibt nur ein einziges Menschenrecht', *Die Wandlung IV*. Heidelberg: Schneider, 754–70)

- 1958a. *The Human Condition*. University of Chicago Press
- 1958b. *The Origins of Totalitarianism*. Cleveland, New York: World Publishing Company

1967. *On Revolution*. New York: Viking Press

- 1982. *Lectures on Kant's Political Philosophy*. University of Chicago Press
- 1986. *Elemente und Urspr¨unge totaler Herrschaft*. Stuttgart: Piper
- Balibar, E. 2007. '(De)Constructing the Human as Human Institution: A Reflection on the Coherence of Hannah Arendt's Practical Philosophy', *Social Research* 74(3): 727–39
- Beiner, R.1990. 'Hannah Arendt and Leo Strauss: The Uncommenced Dialogue', *Political Theory* 18(2): 238–54
- Benhabib, S. 1996. *The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah Arendt*. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
- Bentham, J. 1843. 'Anarchical Fallacies: Being an Examination of the Declaration of Rights Issued During the French Revolution', in *The Works of Jeremy Bentham*, vol. II, Edinburgh
- Birmingham, P. 2006. *Hannah Arendt and Human Rights: The Predicament of Common Responsibility*. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press
	- 2007. 'The An-Archic Event of Natality and the "Right to Have Rights"', *Social Research* 74(3): 763–76
- Brunkhorst, H. 1999. *Hannah Arendt*. Munich: C. H. Beck
	- 2002. *Solidarit¨at: Von der B¨urgerfreundschaft zur globalen Rechtsgenossenschaft*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
- Burke, E. 1987. *Reflections on the Revolution in France*. Indianapolis, IN, Cambridge: Hackett
- Cohen, J. L. 1996. 'Rights, Citizenship and the Modern Form of the Social: Dilemmas of Arendtian Republicanism', *Constellations* 3(2): 164–89
- Enders, C. 1977. *Die Menschenw¨urde in der Verfassungsordnung: Zur Dogmatik des Art. 1 GG*. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck ¨
- Helis, J. 2008. 'Hannah Arendt and Human Dignity: Theoretical Foundations and Constitutional Protection of Human Rights', *Journal of Politics and Law* 1(3): 73–8
- Isaac, J. C. 1996. 'A New Guarantee on Earth: Hannah Arendt on Human Dignity and the Politics of Human Rights', *American Political Science Review* 90(1): 61–73
- Kateb, G. 2007. 'Existential Values in Arendt's Treatment of Evil and Morality', *Social Research* 74(3): 811–54
- Menke, C. 2007. 'The "Aporias of Human Rights" and the "One Human Right": Regarding the Coherence of Hannah Arendt's Argument', *Social Research* 74(3): 739–62
- Michelman, F. I. 1996. 'Parsing "A Right to Have Rights"', *Constellations* 3(2): 200–8
- Parekh, S. 2008. *Hannah Arendt and the Challenge of Modernity: A Phenomenology of Human Rights*. New York: Routledge
- Ranciere, J. ` 2004. 'Who Is the Subject of the Rights of Man?', *South Atlantic Quarterly* 103(2–3): 297–310
- Villa, D. 2000. 'Introduction', in D. Villa (ed.), *The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt*. Cambridge University Press, 1–24