

---

### Individual and collective dignity 

MICHA WERNER

Is there such a thing as *collective* dignity? Does it make sense to talk about the dignity of (some of such) entities as the human species as a whole, indigenous peoples, states, religious communities, women, baseball teams or green-eyed men who get up at 7:30? Can we even conceive of dignity as something that could be assigned to collectives? There is no easy answer to these questions, since both parts of the expression 'collective dignity' are problematic even before they are combined. Obviously, dignity is a heavily contested, multifaceted and ambiguous concept; moreover, there are different ways to understand the 'collective' character of 'collective dignity'. Nevertheless, one finds a growing number of references to 'collective dignity' or 'collective human dignity' (for example, De Gaay Fortman 2011; Falk 2009: 58; Howard 1992: 84; International Law Association 2010: 40–3; Mann 2001: 34–6). However, most of them come without any effort to clarify the meaning of these terms. At the same time, the question of whether collective dignity can be warranted seems systematically relevant, at least in the context of certain branches of the human rights discourse. Let us just consider two rather obvious points. The first has to do with the discussion on 'collective rights': *if* one is of the opinion that collective human rights exist and *if* one, in addition, supposes that dignity is the normative basis or 'source' of human rights, it seems reasonable to ask whether collective human rights are also grounded in some form of collective dignity. The second point is related to one strategy of interpreting and vindicating dignity: *if* one argues that the normative basis of dignity is something like agency and *if* one, in addition, supposes that not only individuals but also collectives can be agents, it is again an obvious question whether collective dignity exists.

In what follows, I will first mention some of the most prominent uses of the term 'collective dignity' (2nd section) and then make some tentative remarks about the extent to which these uses are plausible (3rd section).

#### **Different uses of the term 'dignity'**

As is well known, the meaning of the term 'dignity' has changed significantly throughout history, and different semantic layers are still present in its current uses. In general, 'dignity' signifies a certain *normative status* of an entity; a status that is attributed on the basis of certain intrinsic or relational *properties* the entity is taken to have (for example, that it holds a certain social role or office, or behaves in a certain way, or that it is created in the likeness of God, or that it is an agent, or an autonomous or rational being) and that consists of, entails or warrants certain – more or less formalized – *rights and/or duties* of the entity who 'has' dignity. It is important to note that 'rights and/or duties' does not necessarily mean full-fledged moral or legal rights in a modern sense. They may just be some informal normative expectation, and its content may be nothing more than some emotional or social attitude. Just like other normative terms, 'dignity' is sometimes used in a derivative, non-normative way, in which case to ascribe dignity to an entity does not imply acknowledging or ascribing some normative status to the entity but mainly stating that such status is in fact assigned to it by the entity itself or by (some relevant part of) its social environment. For example, a historian may write about the specific dignity of kings in earlier times without accepting any of the normative commitments that constituted the respective conception of dignity.

#### **Collective dignity and the duties of political collectives**

A first group of references to collective dignity focuses on the moral *duties* of those to whom this dignity is attributed. A typical example can be found in Fuller (2006: 108): 'Second-class citizenship is incompatible with dignity – not only the dignity of those consigned to it, but the collective dignity of the society that tolerates the discrimination.' Sometimes, it is not (only) assumed that collective dignity constitutes certain duties, but (also) that the collective will somehow lose its dignity if it does not respect them, for example where Lopez claims that the immigration detention system of the United States 'robs ´ us [citizens of the USA] of our collective dignity' (2011). However, something appears puzzling here. If the dignity of *X* brings about certain duties for *X*, *and* if to neglect these duties destroys *X's* dignity, it seems all too easy for *X* to get away with his neglecting his duties: they would vanish the very moment he neglects them.1 Hence it seems that the dignity that*constitutes* certain duties (or rights) is not the same as the dignity that one *earns by respecting* the respective duties (or that one *destroys by disrespecting* the rights) in question, though the two different forms of dignity might be related in some straightforward way. For example, in a Kantian line, one can plausibly distinguish the dignity *X* has due to his property of *being able* to respect moral laws from the dignity *X* earns by *respecting* these moral laws.

Independent of whether collective dignity is taken as the source of collective duties, or as something a collective 'earns' by respecting these duties, or both, it remains to be asked what is actually collective about it, and in what sense.

<sup>1</sup> A problem of the same sort arises if we assume that *Y*'s dignity or *Y*'s humanity is the source of certain rights of *Y and* assume that, by disrespecting these rights, we dehumanize *Y* or deprive him of his dignity.

However, before we enter this discussion, we should first consider some of the alternative uses of the term 'collective dignity'. Let us just note one obvious point: where 'collective dignity' is related to duties of the respective collective, this collective has to be seen as some sort of collective agent. In fact, most respective uses of the term 'collective dignity' are about the dignity of political entities, and are related to actions of political institutions, especially the government. Hence, any interpretation of what is collective about this type of collective dignity will be directly related to the interpretation of collective agents.

#### **Collective dignity, the struggle for collective recognition, and collective rights**

A second type of use of the term 'collective dignity' emphasizes the rights, not the duties, of the respective collectives. For example, as Cheah (2006: 73) notes, in the context of decolonization 'national self-determination' has sometimes been 'understood as a people's achievement of collective dignity so that it can participate as an equal member in democratic self-legislation on the global stage' (for example, Cabral1972; Kiros 2001:107; cf. Margalit and Raz 1990; Smith 1981). This understanding of collective dignity refers to the normative status of peoples or other collectives that deserve to be or actually are recognized as having a distinct identity, and the ability as well as the right to govern themselves.

Obviously, struggles for the recognition of distinct identities do not only arise on the macro-level of international relations but also within the borders of modern national states; and it is here that uses of the term 'collective dignity' or 'collective human dignity' come closest to – and potentially interfere the most with – uses of the concept of individual dignity as the source of human rights. Some authors hold that, just as individual dignity can be seen as the source of individual human rights, collective dignity should count as the source of collective (human) rights or rather group rights, like rights of minorities.

For example, Rhoda Howard argues that the claims of '[m]any indigenous groups . . . for the recognition of their collective or communal rights' do not, or at least not primarily, originate from their being 'interested in the human rights of the individual members of their collectivities'. Rather, Howard claims, 'they are interested in the recognition of their *collective dignity*, in the acknowledgement of the value of their collective way of life as opposed to the way of life of the dominant society into which they are usually "integrated"' (Howard 1992: 83f). While, in Howard's terminology, the concept of human rights always refers to *individual* human rights, human dignity can be either individual or collective (*ibid*.: 84). However, Howard's understanding of 'human' dignity does not imply the idea that one enjoys it 'merely because one is a human being'. Rather, she defines human dignity as 'the particular cultural understandings of the inner moral worth of the human person and his or her proper political relations with society' (*ibid*.: 83; emphasis omitted). In Howard's view, the normative status of human dignity is a social construct, something 'that is granted at birth or on incorporation into the community as a concomitant of one's particular ascribed status, or that accumulates and is earned during the life of an adult' (*ibid*.).

While in Howard's view there does not seem to be any fundamental difference between individual and collective (human) dignity, Christian Neuhauser aims ¨ at a more moderate account of collective dignity within the borders of ethical individualism. According to Neuhauser, collectives cannot have 'personal' dig- ¨ nity, but may still enjoy 'something like shared dignity' (Neuhauser ¨ 2011: 22) which can be seen as the proper basis of collective rights (*ibid*.: 21, 32f). Obviously, what 'shared dignity' means in this context needs to be specified, since any form of individual dignity is 'shared' in a certain sense as soon as it is assigned to more than one individual (for example, individual human dignity is usually thought to be 'shared' by all human beings). Hence, Neuhauser tries to clarify ¨ the specifically 'collective' or 'social' character of 'shared dignity' by pointing to three possible violations of the dignity that is shared within a group: direct, symbolic, and representative group humiliation (*ibid*.: 22, 23, 25, emphasis omitted). In the case of *direct* group humiliation, 'all members of a group are directly humiliated precisely because they are members of this group'. *Symbolic* group humiliations are acts that are directed against symbols of a group that express or are intentionally linked to a real threat against the group. *Representative* group humiliations means that 'a whole group is humiliated through the humiliation of one or more of its members' (*ibid*.: 25). This is the case, Neuhauser ¨ argues, if '[t]he humiliation of some members of a group . . . is directed against a collectively shared part of identity', if 'this shared part of identity is constitutive for [recte: of] the self-respect of the members of this group' and if 'the humiliation is sanctioned on a social level and/or no appropriate measures against it are taken.' (*ibid*.: 30). According to Neuhauser, these forms of group ¨ humiliations highlight an 'essentially social' or 'collective dimension of dignity' (*ibid*.: 32) which lies in-between 'dignity, on the one hand, and social honor, on the other . . . Social dignity is dignity and not only honor, because without it someone is not a fully respected member of a society. But it is social and not human dignity, because this does not necessarily mean that someone could not be a respected member in another kind of society of humans.' According to Neuhauser, this concept of social dignity can be seen as an argument for 'group ¨ rights . . . and special policies . . . like . . . affirmative action . . . because whether a society is confronted with a humiliating discrimination or not can only be seen on a group level' (*ibid*.: 33).

As is well known, the notion of collective rights, group rights or minority rights is heavily contested (for example, Tamir 1999). Moreover, not everyone who defends collective rights or group rights shares the idea that these rights originate from something like collective dignity (cf. Kymlicka 1995; 2001; Wall 2007). Still another position is taken by Bastiaan de Gaay Fortman (2011) who regards the concept of minority rights as a 'major misconception' (*ibid*.), but suggests that the notion of collective human dignity could form the basis of a more convincing alternative.

#### **Collective human dignity as the dignity of the human species**

In a different line, collective *human* dignity is taken to signify a normative status that 'belongs to humankind' rather than to its individual members. The idea seems to be that human dignity is not only *shared* among members of the human species (so that each human being would 'own his/her share' of dignity) but that it belongs to all human beings like a common property. Accordingly, Steven Malby takes the decision of the French Conseil d'Etat 'that it was an affront to human dignity to allow the throwing (for sport) of a person selected by reason for [recte: of] his physical handicap, despite the willing participation of the dwarf involved' to draw on a notion of collective dignity (Malby 2002: 110). However, the idea that human dignity does not only warrant but also restricts the right to self-determination does not necessarily imply a notion of collective dignity. Nevertheless, references to the collective 'dignity of the human species'2 do play a prominent role in the moral and legal discourse on biomedical issues like abortion, cloning or human enhancement. These references usually share two features: first, they emphasize that (this form of) human dignity is grounded in human nature alone and not in demanding capacities that only *some* human beings possess. Second, they take the dignity of the species to impose restrictions even on actions that do not (directly or evidently) affect the claim rights of another (already existing) person, as in the case of reproductive cloning. This idea of dignity of the species may seem selfevident to those who believe that all human life is created in the likeness of God. Some authors, however – most prominently Jurgen Habermas ( ¨ 2003) – try to establish a more cautious philosophical reconstruction of the idea. Habermas distinguishes between 'human dignity as guaranteed by law to every person' and 'the dignity of human life' (*ibid*.: 35f; cf. *ibid*.: 77). Whereas the former is grounded in relations of intersubjective recognition between equal persons, the latter needs to be established as part of our 'ethical self-understanding of the species' (*ibid*.: 40). While this self-understanding expresses ideas of a good life that are controversial in many respects, it is also 'closely interwoven with our self-understanding as moral persons' (*ibid*.: 67). Accordingly, the 'dignity of human life' lies in those features of the ethical self-understanding of the human species that are essential for our ability to regard ourselves as equal members within a community of all human beings. While Habermas emphasizes the difference between the dignity of human life and personal human dignity, the former is also sometimes understood as a direct object of legal protection (for

<sup>2</sup> Such references would find support in the formula of the end in itself of Kant's Categorical Imperative ('act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of another, always at the same time as an end and never simply as a means': Kant 1968: 429) only if we could take the term 'humanity' ('*Menschheit*') to refer to the collective of human beings rather than to the essential quality of being human, which seems doubtful (Joerden 2005; Muller-Terpitz ¨ 2007: 331).

example, Isensee 2001) – an interpretation that is heavily contested (for example, with further references, Schluter ¨ 2008: 113f).

#### **Discussion**

Since we now have some overview of the most common uses of the concept of 'collective dignity', let me add some tentative remarks about the extent to which these uses are plausible.

First, what I proposed as a common denominator of different interpretations of 'dignity' (in short: that it signifies a specific normative status of an entity, attributed on the basis of certain intrinsic or relational properties and consisting of, entailing or warranting certain rights and/or duties of the respective entity) surely leaves conceptual space for collective dignity. For even those who are sceptical about collective agency, identity or responsibility will probably acknowledge that collective entities can enjoy a normative status, at least insofar as we can take them as *personae fictae*, like legal persons. For example, if one takes the normative status of dignity to be nothing more than a specific right not to be humiliated (Gan 2009), the idea of collective dignity is *prima facie*just as conceptually problematic as other rights of collectives – they seem possible at least in the sense of a legal fiction. However, that it is conceptually possible, at least in the minimal sense of a legal fiction, to ascribe dignity to collectives does not yet imply that it is plausible or useful to do so. Hence we need to ask whether there are any good reasons to ascribe dignity to (certain) collectives.

As for the first type of uses we considered, we may at least guess one of the *goals* that may be served by the normative fiction of collective dignity. Appeals to the 'collective dignity' of a political community (for example, a state which treats 'illegal' immigrants in a humiliating way) can be seen as instances of a *performative use of moral language* that aims at constructing a shared identity. Accordingly, they need not presuppose an already existing collective identity, collective intentionality or collective responsibility. Rather, they may serve as attempts to prompt identification and form collective intentions in the first place – as summons to unify and take responsibility collectively.

What about those uses that link 'collective dignity' to rights, especially to group rights? To begin with, it is striking that in many of the respective uses the meaning of 'collective dignity' remains quite close to (social) honour. According to Neuhauser, 'it is difficult to draw a clear line between social honor and ¨ human dignity' (Neuhauser ¨ 2011: 27; see also Howard 1992: 83). If we accept this interpretation, the notion of collective dignity seems reasonable in at least the following way: insofar as our dignity refers to elements of our identity that are essentially collective (for example, certain aspects of a shared language or culture), and to the extent that the same elements also form part of the dignity of other members of a collective, our dignity may also be called collective. Against this background, it seems plausible that '[i]f a humiliation is directed against a collectively shared part of identity, the whole group is humiliated' (Neuhauser ¨ 2011; 27). This is what Neuhauser calls 'symbolic group humiliation'. ¨

Paradoxically, though, it is precisely the fact that it is easy to grasp the meaning of this form of collective dignity and of group humiliation that makes it hard to understand why it should give rise to *group rights*. Note that we should distinguish between collective rights and group rights. According to De Gaay Fortman, collective rights are 'rights that by their nature can be enjoyed collectively', like self-determination or the right to a healthy environment. In the case of group rights, on the other hand, 'the legal subject is a collective entity no matter the character of the rights involved' (De Gaay Fortman 2011: 284). So in the case of group rights or minority rights, the *rights-holder* is the collective rather than a number of individuals. Given this distinction, it is easy to see why the step from collective dignity (as defined above) to group rights is not at all necessary. For one can certainly try to protect collective interests or collective values within the framework of individual rights, or 'collective' rights *sensu* De Gaay Fortman (see Griffin 2008: 260). Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights is probably the most prominent exemplification of this point.3

Hence, additional arguments are needed in order to show that collective dignity (taken as something close to social honour) needs to be protected by group rights. As for direct group humiliations, Neuhauser argues that, because ¨ '[i]t is by virtue . . . of being a member of this group that . . . individuals are humiliated', the 'struggle for recognition must' also 'focus on the group level and should not isolate the affected individuals' (Neuhauser ¨ 2011: 22f); but this is not obvious. Being identified as a member of a certain group by those who take this very membership as a reason to humiliate me is no sufficient reason for me to identify with the respective group. I may rather have good reasons to resist the whole system of classification, because it is as such arbitrary and virtually humiliating. Moreover, even if I do understand myself as member of an encompassing group (cf. Margalit 1996; Margalit and Raz 1990) whose collective dignity needs to be protected, it may not be the best option to grant rights to the group rather than to each of us individually. While it is sometimes strategically useful to take measures against discrimination collectively as a group, this is not always the case. Moreover, the introduction of legal or even moral group rights creates theoretical as well as practical problems, for example concerning the proper definition of group membership (De Gaay Fortman2011), concerning the requirements for the internal structure of groups, and, last but not least, concerning possible conflicts between group rights and individual

3 'This article contains a minority provision and reads as follows: "In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the other members of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion or to use their own language". It is already apparent from the wording that though this minority right has collective aspects, it is granted not to minorities as such, but to the individual members of these groups. This view is confirmed by the General Comment on Article 27, which was adopted in 1994 by the Human Rights Committee' (Galenkamp 1995: 56).

rights (Griffin 2008; Tamir 1999; for a somewhat cautious defence of the idea of group rights, see Jovanovic 2005). These challenges remain, regardless of whether we think of group rights as protections against direct, symbolic or representative group humiliation.4

General problems with group rights aside, one may wonder to what extent a concept of dignity that is so close to the notion of honour can be seen as the source of rights. Obviously, not all forms of honour are worthy of protection. As Neuhauser puts it, some people 'ground their self-respect in the wrong things' ¨ (Neuhauser ¨ 2011: 33). However, what are the criteria for 'right' forms of selfrespect? For example, what distinguishes the collective dignity of a people that strives for self-determination from rabid nationalism?

This question leads to two more general challenges that those who link the notion of collective dignity to rights are faced by. As a matter of fact, these authors either take *dignity itself as a specific right* (for example, the right not to be humiliated), or, alternatively (drawing on a descriptive notion of dignity) take it as the *content of such specific right* (for example, a certain social state that needs to be protected like the social conditions of self-respect). Either way, these authors need to determine the scope and boundaries of dignity. Second, they need to vindicate the normative force of the respective right.

As is well known, one of the most prominent competing interpretations of dignity takes this concept just as the main element of a *solution* to the problem of specifying and justifying human rights. In this Kantian interpretation, human dignity is seen as the normative source and/or the governing principle of the whole human rights framework. However, the Kantian notion of dignity has rarely been used to explain the meaning of *collective* dignity, taken as a collectively 'owned' normative status of a group or collective. Even Habermas, who in general subscribes to the Kantian idea of *individual* human dignity (Habermas 2010), emphasizes the link between dignity and honour where he talks about the *collective* aspect of the dignity of human life (Habermas 2003: 37) and takes it as a matter of our collective ethical self-interpretation rather than a moral concept.5 This may be explained by the fact that Habermas' notion of the dignity

- 4 As a matter of fact, Neuhauser ¨ himself is not completely clear about the normative standing of groups since he sometimes affirms and sometimes denies that groups as such can be humiliated (cf. Neuhauser ¨ 2011: 31, 34, 35). Besides, if we take Neuhauser's ¨ criterion for *representative* group humiliation seriously, it boils down to *direct* group humiliation. Since the crucial element of this criterion is that the humiliating act against a member of a group 'is sanctioned on a social level and/or no appropriate measures against it are taken', and this is tantamount to a situation wherein social protection is withheld from all members of the group, which is a case of *direct* group humiliation. The act of a representative humiliation against an individual member of the group together with the lack of adequate social reactions, are just the *epistemic* conditions that make the lack of social protection of all group members *visible*.
- 5 For Habermas, the ethical use of practical reason answers questions of a good life that are subordinated to moral questions of what we owe to each other; see Habermas

of human life relates to the status of a certain (civilized) biological species, and that membership of a biological species is certainly not rationally unavoidable in the same sense as those more formal features of agency or rational nature that have been exploited by traditional Kantian justifications of dignity.6 However, it does seem reasonable to ask whether Kant's idea of a kingdom of ends can be defended or reformulated in a plausible way, and, if so, whether this notion would warrant a specific dignity of this 'community' that is distinct from and irreducible to the dignity of its members.

#### **References**

- Brune, J. P. 2010. *Moral und Recht: Zur Diskurstheorie des Rechts und der Demokratie von J¨urgen Habermas*. Freiburg im Breisgau: Alber
- Cabral, A. 1972. 'Identity and Dignity in the National Liberation Struggle', *Africa Today* 19(4): 39–47
- Cheah, P. 2006. *Inhuman Conditions: On Cosmopolitanism and Human Rights*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Darwall, S. L. 2006. *The Second-Person Standpoint: Morality, Respect, and Accountability*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- De Gaay Fortman, B. 2011. 'Minority Rights: A Major Misconception?', *Human Rights Quarterly* 33(2): 265–303
- Falk, R. A. 2009. *Achieving Human Rights*. New York: Routledge
- Fuller, R. W. 2006. *All Rise: Somebodies, Nobodies, and the Politics of Dignity*. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler
- Galenkamp, M. 1995. 'Collective Rights', Advisory Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Policy of the Netherlands', *SIM Special* 16: 53–106
- Gan, S. 2009. 'Human Dignity as a Right', *Frontiers of Philosophy in China* 4(3): 370–84 (doi:10.1007/s11466-009-0024-3)
- Gewirth, A. 1978. *Reason and Morality*. University of Chicago Press 1996. *The Community of Rights*. University of Chicago Press
- Griffin, J. 2008. *On Human Rights*. Oxford University Press
- Habermas, J. 1993. *Justification and Application: Remarks on Discourse Ethics*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
	- 2003. *The Future of Human Nature*. Cambridge: Polity
	- 2010. 'The Concept of Human Dignity and the Realistic Utopia of Human Rights', *Metaphilosophy* 41(4): 464–80 (doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2010.01648.x)
- Howard, R. E. 1992. 'Dignity, Community and Human Rights', in A. A. A. Na'im (ed.). *Human Rights in Cross-Cultural Perspectives: A Quest for Consensus*. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 81–102

1993: 1–18. However, insofar as Habermas assumes our 'species ethical' selfunderstanding as members of the human species to be constitutive for our ability to regard ourselves as equal and autonomous members of a moral community, this self-understanding seems to have moral significance as well. In the end, the status of Habermas' concept of dignity of human life remains somewhat ambiguous (for further discussion, see Brune 2010: 464f; Kaufmann and Sosoe 2005).

6 For example, Darwall 2006; Gewirth 1978, 1996; Korsgaard 2009.

- International Law Association. 2010. *Interim Report of The Hague Conference on Rights of Indigenous Peoples*
- Isensee, J. 2001. 'Die alten Grundrechte und die biotechnische Revolution', in J. Bohnert, C. Gramm, U. Kindhauser cs. (eds.) ¨ *Verfassung – Philosophie – Kirche: Festschrift f¨ur Alexander Hollerbach zum 70. Geburtstag*. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 243–66
- Joerden, J. C. 2005. 'Der Begriff "Menschheit" in Kants Zweckformel des kategorischen Imperativs und Implikationen fur die Begriffe "Menschenw ¨ urde" und "Gat- ¨ tungswurde', in M. Kaufmann and L. Sosoe (eds.). ¨ *Gattungsethik – Schutz f¨ur das Menschengeschlecht?*. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 177–92
- Jovanovic, M. A. 2005. 'Recognizing Minority Identities Through Collective Rights', *Human Rights Quarterly* 27(2): 625–51
- Kant, Immanuel. 1968. *Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten*, in *Werke: Akademie Textausgabe*, vol. 4. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 385–464
- Kaufmann, M., and Sosoe, L. (eds.). 2005. *Gattungsethik Schutz f¨ur das Menschengeschlecht?*. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang
- Kiros, T. 2001. *Explorations in African Political Thought: Identity, Community, Ethics*. London, New York: Routledge
- Korsgaard, C. M. 2009. *Self-Constitution: Agency, Identity, and Integrity*. Oxford University Press
- Kymlicka, W.1995. *Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal Theory of Minority Rights*. Oxford: Clarendon Press
	- 2001. *Politics in the Vernacular: Nationalism, Multiculturalism, and Citizenship*. Oxford University Press
- Lopez, V. ´ 2011. 'Immigration Detention System Robs Us of Our Collective Dignity'. http://azstarnet.com/news/opinion/article 456b3110-154b-54ea-af1c-d18f666c3a9f. html (accessed 21 July 2012)
- Malby, S. 2002. 'Human Dignity and Human Reproductive Cloning', *Health and Human Rights* 6(1): 102–35 (doi:10.2307/4065316)
- Mann, J. 2001. 'Dignity and Health: The UDHR's Revolutionary First Article', *Health and Human Rights* 3(2): 30–8
- Margalit, A. 1996. *The Decent Society*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press

Margalit, A., and Raz, J. 1990. 'National Self-Determination', *Journal of Philosophy* 87(9): 439–61 (doi:10.2307/2026968)

- Muller-Terpitz, R. ¨ 2007. *Der Schutz des pr¨anatalen Lebens: eine verfassungs-, v¨olkerund gemeinschaftsrechtliche Statusbetrachtung an der Schwelle zum biomedizinischen Zeitalter*. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck ¨
- Neuhauser, C. ¨ 2011. 'Humiliation: The Collective Dimension', in P. Kaufmann, H. Kuch and C. Neuhauser (eds.). ¨ *Humiliation, Degradation, Dehumanization: Human Dignity Violated*. New York: Springer, 21–36
- Schluter, J. ¨ 2008. *Schutzkonzepte f¨ur menschliche Keimbahnzellen in der Fortpflanzungsmedizin*. Munster: LIT Verlag ¨
- Smith, A. D. 1981. *The Ethnic Revival*. Cambridge University Press
- Tamir, Y. 1999. 'Against Collective Rights', in C. Joppke and S. Lukes (eds.) *Multicultural Questions*. Oxford University Press, 158–81
- Wall, S. 2007. 'Collective Rights and Individual Autonomy', *Ethics* 117(2): 234–64 (doi:10.1086/511197)