

---

### Is human dignity a useless concept? Legal perspectives

JUDGE CHRISTIAN BYK

If we consider that the concept of human dignity appeared only quite recently (afterthe Second World War) as a legal reference, we may have doubts regarding its utility. Why should we consider useful a concept which was legally nonexistent since Roman legal reasoning? But we may interpret the question posed in the title of this chapter to raise another issue: what is the meaning of utility in a legal perspective? All lawyers – whether in the tradition of common law or civil law – know that the law uses concepts to create legal categories and to qualify facts and situations in order to incorporate them in the social theatre in which we all live. In that sense, the rationality of the law tends to have useful social meanings and does not need purely theoretical or metaphysical concepts because they cannot serve its main purpose: to maintain the organization of the society on the basis of legal norms. I understand that the vagueness and uncertainty of the concept of human dignity may create some trouble and disinterest in using it as a legal reference, especially for those who conceive of law as a practical exercise which aims at finding the appropriate answers to precise questions (discussed in the first section below). However, as a pragmatic lawyer, I have also to consider that the concept of human dignity is already present in international law as well as in different domestic legislation. Its appearance during the second part of the twentieth century should not be neglected in understanding the message sent by its introduction in law (discussed in the second section below).

#### **A vague but powerful concept**

#### The theoretical difficulties of the concept

Regarding *the definition* of the concept, dignity – *dignitas* – was associated by the Romans with the respect and honour due to a person with an important position. In this time, it had no universal meaning. The idea that humanity – the gathering of all human beings: '*hoi anthropoi*' as the ancient Greeks would have called it – could be defined by an intrinsic value simply did not exist. And for many centuries this remained the same. In particular, the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen refers to the word 'dignity' in Article 6 to express that every citizen is eligible for all high offices. The transformation of the meaning of human dignity appeared only with the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights when it states (Article 1) that 'all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights'. From a social distinction, dignity became an essential characteristic of each human being: what made him unique, sacred. Therefore, dignity is the founding value of the respect due to each human person, whatever his or her biological or social condition might be. I feel that many people will object to the transubstantiation of the definition of dignity. I can hear their claims: what may justify and support this idea of an intrinsic and fundamental value of each human being? To satisfy this legitimate request, we then take the risk to enter complex and controversial philosophical or theological discussion that may be far from our legal perspectives. We may refer to Plato and the Christian theology according to which the human spirit is from a divine nature (*imago Dei*). We may also believe, as the philosopher Paul Ricœur expressed, that 'something is due to each human being simply because he is human' (Raymond 1988: 236f).

Another strong criticism of the concept of human dignity concerns its *interpretation and implementation*. Depending on the philosophical roots a person holds the notion of dignity to possess, using the concept may result in opposed views. One may argue that human dignity will justify assisting a suffering person in dying, while others will say that dignity means to respect human life. Dignity is also used as a knock-down argument to fight practices viewed as unethical, such as human reproductive cloning or genetic sex selection. Reference to human dignity can be an easy way to eliminate those practices without developing further reasoning. The French administrative Supreme Court has ruled that the throwing of a dwarf during a circus performance was a violation of human dignity, even though this meant that the dwarf would have to find another job. The broad definition and opposed interpretations create legal uncertainty that may certainly prejudice the utility of the concept of human dignity as well as our trust in the legal system.

#### The utility of a dynamic concept in a pluralistic system of law

However, my view is that all these difficulties, although very real, are not obstacles that prevent us from benefiting from the concept of human dignity. People grew indignant at injustice and atrocities before the concept of human dignity was invented. It means that the idea of dignity is born through concrete realities of resentment, and has developed man's moral conscience. When the authors of the 1948Universal Declaration of Human Rights unanimously agreed, after the crimes of the Nazi regime, to acknowledge that each human being had equal dignity, they upheld different political, philosophical and religious views. We need the notion of human dignity as a reminder that the perpetration of violence against others may create a negation not only of the humanity of others but of our own humanity. Although human dignity has complex origins and leads to an uncontrolled variety of applications, it is a key notion of human rights law. For some authors, it is even a 'mother principle' ('*principe matriciel*') which supports and grounds all other substantial principles in human rights including the respect of the human being and human life.

Broadly referred to as a goal or value in all international human rights documents, human dignity has also largely been incorporated since the 1990s as a reference concept in most international instruments adopted in the field of biomedicine by the Council of Europe, the European Union, the World Health Organization and UNESCO. The main reason for such an expansion in the use of the notion is the creation of a conceptual link between human rights law in general and human rights law in the biomedical field, and also the clear assertion that biomedicine and biotechnology should not transform the human person into an instrument for science. Human dignity is also a powerful concept precisely because – much like fundamental legal or philosophical concepts such as family, love, good, justice etc. – it may be interpreted in various ways and serve as a guiding value – and not a dogma – to face a changing world. Therefore, the development of the concept of human dignity has to take into account those recurrent contradictions to support public discussion and to reach a balanced view in order to define the limits which, at a given time, a society should adopt to conform its practices to its values.

#### Dignity is a value which defines and should guide humanity

Once again, many would argue that vagueness and ambiguity are sufficient reasons to eliminate the concept of human dignity as a legal reference. Undoubtedly, law requires certainty and predictability. Undoubtedly, human dignity is not sufficient to solve all the questions posed by the progress of science and technology. Undoubtedly, it needs to be assisted by notions which are legally more precise and that could therefore facilitate the implementation of the legal norms. But, as a guiding principle, the concept of human dignity has two major useful roles: it helps define what humanity is and it gives us the opportunity of a discussion on the limits of human power.

#### The 'anthropological' function of dignity: defining humanity

First, the concept of human dignity has an essentialist function: it appears anthropological, even ontological. It points out to us what we are, our humanity. At the same time, it invites us, particularly taking into consideration the development of sciences and technology, to question the transformations of the content and the perception of this humanity. It is thus not, from this viewpoint, a philosophically useless concept. It would rather be a reminder of our human condition: we are in a quest to find some transcendental origin (jusnaturalism, divine mystery etc.), but at the same time, we have to accept that man has to realize himself in a relative world.

In substantive law, the extension of the concept of human dignity to the speciesis already a reality. As ruled by the French Constitutional Council, respect for the principle of dignity is part of the integrity of mankind. Taking this as a starting-point, certain authors argue that – in particular after the adoption in the French Constitution (2005) of the Charter of the environment – here lie the premises of a 'radical' evolution, leading to a possible extension of the principle of dignity to future generations and the environment. In international law, the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights – which was adopted by UNESCO in 2005 and introduces the idea of responsibility towards future generations, the protection of the world biosphere and environment – could also be understood as driven by such a prospect.

#### The dialectical function of dignity: a struggle for ourselves and against ourselves

We should thus admit that, on a political view, dignity is a concept which – although it certainly clarifies our understanding of the *conditio humana* – is constituted by and specified in a confrontation between our acts and our values. Dignity is thus related to the capacities for choice and responsibility because it obliges us to question ourselves, regarding the measure of our freedom, our capacities and the way in which we exert them. It is, to some extent, a recall of the awareness that, after Auschwitz, how others perceive us imposes on us a constraint: a responsibility to defend the dignity of others and safeguard humanity. The absolute character of dignity lies, then, not in the specific rules that it imposes on us. It lies rather in the lightning glance that it sheds on the world which surrounds us and the responsibilities which rise from our freedom. In that, it is a struggle for ourselves but also against ourselves. It is what makes Xavier Bioy argue that because the individual sees himself legally constrained to articulate his human condition, he becomes responsible for it (Bioy 2006).

#### The question of confrontation between personal freedom and dignity

#### Dignity, a contextual concept

The difficulty with determining the meaning of the concept of dignity does not lie in the ascribed primacy of human dignity over all other principles of human rights law, but rather in conceptualizing dignity while taking into account the singularity of specific cases. Wherein, for instance, is the dignity of the disabled person found: in his refusal to claim financial 'compensation' for his disadvantage, or, conversely, in the payment of special allowances allowing him to lead a more normal life? When is the dignity of the dwarf recognized: in the prohibition of degrading practices (dwarf-throwing) or in respecting his rational capacities to choose a line of work? Such contextualist problems are all the more stringent since the meaning of dignity evolves over time: to work is today a right, while for the nobility of the *Ancien R´egime* it would have been an infringement of their dignity. They are also culture-dependent: in France, for example, prostitution is regarded as a freedom, while in many other countries it is prohibited.

#### Dignity, a way to moderate the excesses of individual freedom

Dignity can be thus used only to justify the interference of public authorities in controlling excesses of personal freedom, including when these excesses endanger only the person whose freedom is in question. They are 'constraints of humanity' (cf. Kant 1998). But generally, these limits must respect the rule of proportionality.

It is only when the use of the concept of dignity has an important symbolic impact, in particular in the eyes of the public, that it authorizes the establishment of absolute prohibitions, even if the coherence of those is not always obvious. (Mathieu Bertrand (2010) thus points out that human reproductive cloning undermines the principle of dignity only qua intention; the children who would be born via this method would profit from equal dignity. On the contrary, therapeutic cloning is essentially contrary to dignity since it instrumentalizes the embryo.) The appreciation of these potential conflicts, and in particular of that between dignity and personal freedom (or right to autonomy), will have to be solved keeping in mind that, in national as in international law, there is no hierarchy between human rights.

The French Constitutional Council Decision of 27 July 1994, which ranked the protection of health and the rights of the family (tenth and eleventh subparagraphs of the Preamble to the Constitution) equally to the safeguard of human dignity and personal freedom, does nothing but recall what had already been ruled by courts previously. Admittedly, international law recognizes the absolute character of certain prohibitions (torture, slavery), which find their basis in the concept of dignity, but, for the implementation of other rights (in particular the right to private life or freedom of expression), the influence of dignity must be appreciated in light of factual circumstances (see the prohibition of the Benetton campaign using an 'AIDS mark' on the skin of the models photographed).

Dignity is a primary principle. It irrigates and inspires a number of fundamental principles, but it does not institute them and does not govern legal scheduling. To preserve the 'absolutism' of dignity, it must maintain a special place. From this place, dignity can be a powerful moral fibre, breath or 'holy spirit', which animates the legal system and maintains a necessary tension between the transcendence of law and the contingent nature of standards.

#### **Conclusion**

It is normal and useful that dignity contributes to the legal debate, but it must preserve a certain autonomy since it is itself dependent on several guiding principles: coherence and legal certainty, social peace, open-ended interpretation of the provisions, the concern for human consideration and the need for allowing for, in particular in the field of private and family life, certain behaviours that may be considered as unusual by a majority of people.

However, if dignity is to contribute to our understanding regarding the fundamental principles of the law, it should not result in nourishing a 'legal fundamentalism' which would exclude from the benefit of the 'social contract' the people whose behaviours would be judged heterodox. The recognition in full and whole of the dignity of each human being supposes on the contrary, to build via democratic debate, a meaningful social standard by which to live – if possible with the support of all. It supposes that we understand that the safeguarding of humanity depends on the strength and the quality of exchanges between all men and between man, the biosphere and the environment.

#### **References**

- Bertrand, M. 2010. 'La dignite, principe fondateur du droit', ´ *Journal international de bio´ethique* 21(3): 77–83
- Bioy, X. 2006. 'La dignite: questions de principes', in H. Pauliat and S. Gaboriau (eds.), ´ *Justice, ethique et dignit´e: cinqui`emes entretiens d'Aguesseau*. Limoges University Press, 47–86
- Kant, I. 1998. *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. M. Gregor. Cambridge University Press
- Raymond, J. F. 1988. *Les enjeux des droits de l'homme*. Paris: Larousse