

---

### The Islamic world and the alternative declarations of human rights

#### ANN ELIZABETH MAYER

Since the appearance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, various human rights declarations have been proposed that purport to set forth alternative Islamic principles on human rights. How Islam pertains to human rights remains contested, and none of the proposed Islamic human rights declarations can be taken as a definitive statement of Islamic human rights. The Islamic heritage is diffuse and complex, and trends in contemporary Islamic thought vary widely. Moreover, the rationale for producing Islamic alternatives is challenged by Muslims who embrace the UDHR as consonant with their faith along with the concept of dignity that is linked to the human rights that it sets forth.

The idea that Islam possesses its own distinctive version of human rights has been promoted by conservative forces in Muslim societies that seek to uphold rules of Islamic law, or *Shariʿa*, that are in conflict with the UDHR. In league with some of these conservative forces, governments of Muslim countries have sponsored alternative declarations and resolutions that rely on Islamic elements to rationalize non-compliance with the UDHR, eliminating some UDHR rights and circumscribing others. Where the concept of dignity figures in such declarations, because it accommodates inequality and restrictions on rights, it takes on colourations unlike those of dignity in the UDHR.

As the years have passed, the 1990 Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam,1 which was put forward by the Organization of the Islamic Conference – renamed in 2011 the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the organization to which all Muslim majority countries belong – has outstripped other Islamic declarations in terms of international prestige. Enjoying observer status at the UN, the OIC has vigorously promoted its positions on human rights in the UN, presenting the Cairo Declaration as the definitive statement of Islamic human rights. Working to coordinate its members' strategies on human rights, the OIC has managed to influence the UN to move towards treating the Cairo Declaration as a legitimate Islamic alternative to the UDHR. The Cairo Declaration was included in the UN documents issuing from the 1993World Conference

<sup>1</sup> Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, 5 August 1990, UN GAOR, World Conference on Human Rights, 4th Session, Agenda Item 5, UN Doc. A/CONF.157/PC/62/Add.18 (1993) (English translation).

on Human Rights in Vienna and was published by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.2 The fact that the Cairo Declaration has won a level of acceptance in the UN human rights system has enhanced the confidence of OIC member states in defending it against charges that it conflicts with the UDHR. At the same time, it has been vigorously critiqued by respected human rights NGOs and by Muslims who are committed to upholding human rights according to international standards, who note the striking deficiencies in the rights protections that it offers.

In issuing the Cairo Declaration, the OIC member states were emulating the method that had been used in drafting the UDHR. They acted on the assumption that a human rights declaration should be endorsed by national governments, in this case governments linked by the religious affiliation of the majority of their citizens. In so doing, the OIC members disregarded the fact that, in terms of Islamic jurisprudence and theology, governments of contemporary Muslim countries possess no authority whatsoever to declare Islamic doctrine on dignity or any other subject. Despite these problems, the endorsements of OIC member states did buttress the credibility of the Cairo Declaration in UN forums.

The terminology of the Cairo Declaration is confusing, at least in part because it is simultaneously seeking to serve OIC members' agendas by establishing an Islamic counter-model to the UDHR that places curbs on rights while also attempting to obscure how significantly it deviates from the UDHR. For this Islamic counter-model to be plausible and to win acceptance in the UN, it had to borrow many aspects of the format and terminology of the UDHR, including terms like 'dignity'. However, dignity in the Cairo Declaration must be understood in relation to provisions that stipulate that all human rights are subordinated to Islamic law, as indicated in Article 24, which states: 'All the rights and freedoms stipulated in this Declaration are subject to the Islamic Shariʿah', and in Article 25, which states: 'The Islamic Shariʿah is the only source of reference for the explanation or clarification to any of the articles of this Declaration.' Because these superimposed Islamic criteria are fundamentally at odds with the egalitarian foundations of the UDHR, one should not be misled into thinking that the intent is to replicate dignity as conceived in the UDHR.

The term dignity appears four times in the Cairo Declaration, and a prohibition of subjecting people to 'indignity' and a right to 'a dignified life' also appear. The Cairo Declaration does not explicitly stipulate that dignity is afforded only subject to Islamic criteria, but it does articulate a closely related proposition. The Preamble treats what it calls a 'right to a dignified life' not as a secular or universal principle but as one that is to be configured according to the rules

<sup>2</sup> *Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments*, vol. II, *Regional Instruments* (New York, Geneva: Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 1997), 475–6.

of Islamic law. It asserts that OIC member states '[wish] to contribute to the efforts of mankind to assert human rights. . . and to affirm his freedom and right to a dignified life in accordance with the Islamic Shariʿah'.

When assessing the parameters of dignity, scholars have appreciated that dignity is an ambiguous term, one that can be used both to affirm equality and to ratify hierarchy. Taking advantage of the ambiguity, the Cairo Declaration treats dignity as being congruent with the inequalities mandated by versions of Islamic law that are favoured by conservative Muslim opinion that subordinates women and non-Muslims. Dignity in this sense is at odds with the UDHR, which in its proclamation effectively repudiates hierarchy when it underscores its 'recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family' and notes the reaffirmation in the UN Charter of 'faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women'.

The Cairo Declaration effectively repudiates the crucial linkage in the UDHR of dignity with equality in rights, and, more specifically, eliminates wording linking dignity to equal rights for men and women. Scrutiny of the language in Article 1(a) of the Cairo Declaration uncovers significant deviations from Article 2 in the UDHR, which indicates that 'everyone' is entitled to the rights and freedoms that it sets forth 'without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status'. In lines that appropriate some of this UDHR language but also introduce religious considerations, the Cairo Declaration in Article 1(a) stipulates: 'All human beings form one family whose members are united by submission to God and descent from Adam. All men are equal in terms of basic human dignity and basic obligations and responsibilities without any discrimination on the grounds of race, colour, language, sex, religious belief, political affiliation, social status or other considerations. True faith is the guarantee for enhancing such dignity along the path to human perfection.'

It is striking that, amidst the obvious borrowings from Article 2 of the UDHR, when the Cairo Declaration speaks of 'all men' being 'equal in terms of basic human dignity' in Article 1(a), this is not paired with any stipulation of equality in rights and freedoms. Instead, equality in 'basic human dignity' is paired with equality in 'basic obligations and responsibilities'. No indication is offered regarding what falls within the categories designated by the adjective 'basic', but presumably discrimination is allowed outside these categories. Article 1(a) of the Cairo Declaration does not clarify what is meant by the affirmation that 'basic human dignity' is to be afforded 'without any discrimination' on the named grounds. A ban on discrimination in obligations might suggest that, because obligations can be seen as the obverse of rights, this amounts to an innocuous variation on the equality in rights stipulated in the UDHR. However, the Cairo Declaration's concept of equality in obligations cannot equate to equality in rights, because scrutiny of other provisions reveals that it is designed to accommodate discriminatory rules that deprive women and non-Muslims of rights. In switching from the UDHR's ban on discrimination affecting rights and freedoms to a ban on discrimination affecting dignity, Article 1(a) breaks with the logic of the UDHR.

Political calculations are the likely reason for the way that Article 1(a) of the Cairo Declaration diverges from its UDHR counterparts. Intending to leave space for retaining laws discriminating in rights based on gender and religion, the countries involved in shaping the Cairo Declaration substituted 'equality in basic human dignity' – a formulation that was devoid of precise legal significance – for the equality in rights and freedoms stipulated in Article 2 of the UDHR. Establishing any principle guaranteeing rights and freedoms without discrimination had to be avoided, because it would expose the legitimacy of their own discriminatory domestic laws, many of which claimed Islamic authority, to challenges. The relatively vague concept of 'equality in basic human dignity' presented itself as an expedient substitute for the original UDHR wording. Since dignity figures prominently in the UDHR, by incorporating the term dignity in Article 1(a), the Cairo Declaration managed to convey at least a superficial impression that it was showing solicitude for the UDHR principle of human dignity and that it was therefore in synchrony with ideals in the UDHR. A careful appraisal of the Cairo Declaration shows that the insertion of dignity and the omission of the UDHR ban on discrimination affecting rights and freedoms is part of a pattern of obfuscation that is designed to leave space for rules conflicting with the UDHR while simultaneously trying to minimize the appearance of conflicts.

The notion that there should be no discrimination with regard to dignity is not coherently elaborated. In fact, the last sentence of Article 1(a) of the Cairo Declaration suggests that its authors believe that there are gradations in dignity, because it indicates that dignity is a quality that is susceptible to enhancement via 'true faith'. Because the entire declaration has a pronounced Islamic bias, with Article 10 positing that 'Islam is the religion of unspoiled nature', the natural inference is that belief in Islam constitutes the 'true faith' that enhances human dignity. This suggests that Muslims have advanced further along what Article 1(a) calls 'the path to human perfection' and thereby benefit from enhanced dignity. This in turn correlates with the idea expressed in the first lines of the Preamble to the Cairo Declaration, in which the authors refer to the concept of Muslims belonging to one community based on religion, the *umma*, and assert that they are '[r]eaffirming the civilizing and historical role of the Islamic Ummah which God made the best nation'. Article 1(a) therefore can be fairly read to say that Muslims possess superior dignity *vis-`a-vis* non-Muslims, with the consequence that non-Muslims are only entitled to an inferior level of dignity, a level that might be what is envisaged as falling into the category that the Cairo Declaration calls 'basic human dignity'. The notion that dignity has gradations would account for the decision to establish what seems to be an inferior, restricted category of dignity, designating it by the otherwise peculiar qualification 'basic'.

In addition to the features of the Cairo Declaration already mentioned that elevate Islam and its adherents to a superior status, Article 10 admonishes after it singles out Islam as the religion of unspoiled nature that '[i]t is prohibited to exercise any form of compulsion on man or to exploit his poverty or ignorance in order to convert him to another religion or to atheism.' This reveals the authors' assumption that other religions are inferior and that apostasy from Islam results from coercive tactics or the exploitation of a Muslim's poverty or ignorance. The possibility that a rational Muslim not afflicted by poverty might freely elect to convert to another religion or to embrace atheism is not conceded. In practice, the principle in Article 10 will be used to justify the common pattern in Muslim countries of criminalizing apostasy from Islam while welcoming and encouraging conversions to Islam. This correlates with a central premise of the Cairo Declaration, that Islam ranks above other religions – with the corollary that its adherents also rank above adherents of other religions.

In Article 1(a) of the Cairo Declaration, human beings are depicted as submitting to God, which correlates with the philosophy of the Cairo Declaration that Islamic law, viewed as God's law, must be observed. Significantly, the Cairo Declaration contains no provision whatsoever protecting freedom of religion or freedom of conscience, nor does it offer language equivalent to the UDHR provision in Article 1 that all human beings 'are endowed with reason and conscience'. Therefore, whatever dignity it does provide cannot imply any duty to respect the freedom of individuals to act according to their reason and conscience; instead, all are deemed to be bound to defer to Islamic law. If the recognition that human beings are endowed with reason and conscience is deemed to be foundational for human dignity, the Cairo Declaration can be fairly viewed as repudiating an essential component of human dignity.

When dignity appears in Article 22(c), it is in the context of a provision that belongs not in a human rights document but in a criminal code and that aims to prohibit expression that offends the dignity of prophets. In context these can only be prophets honoured by Islam. It states: 'Information . . . may not be exploited or misused in such a way as may violate sanctities and the dignity of Prophets.' The rule requiring respect for the dignity of Islamic prophets is a product of political concerns at the time when the Cairo Declaration was prepared, which occurred during a meeting of OIC foreign ministers in Tehran, Iran, in December 1989. The OIC was then confronting the international controversy created when Iran's leader, Ayatollah Khomeini, issued a death edict in February 1989 targeting the British novelist Salman Rushdie for allegedly offending Islam in his novel, *The Satanic Verses*, which featured a fictional pseudo-prophet who in some ways resembled the Prophet Muhammad. Responding to Iran's efforts to obtain backing for Khomeini's position, the authors of the Cairo Declaration tried to craft a version of human rights that would support criminalizing insults to the Prophet Muhammad like the ones allegedly contained in Rushdie's novel. One can see that, in prohibiting the violation of the dignity of prophets, Article 22(c) deploys a version of dignity that indirectly legitimizes Ayatollah Khomeini's death edict – with corresponding negative implications for freedom of expression.

An illustration of how the authors of the Cairo Declaration treat the term dignity as a vessel that can accommodate hierarchical ideas at odds with the UDHR can be found in Article 6(a), which provides: 'Woman is equal to man in human dignity, and has rights to enjoy as well as duties to perform.' (Inconsistent wording seems troubling in this connection, because Article 1(a) had earlier referred to 'all men' having equality in dignity and obligations.) Casual readers could miss the significance of the disparity between Article 6(a) and the UDHR principle that human beings are 'equal in dignity and rights'. By dropping the stipulation that all are equal in rights, the Cairo Declaration deliberately seeks to create space for Muslim countries to continue their longstanding pattern of imposing discriminatory laws affecting women, many of which are justified as reflecting Islamic requirements, and treating women as inferior beings subject to patriarchal control. Laws in a few Muslim countries essentially reduce women to the status of chattel, often in the guise of upholding Islamic law and morality. In deliberately avoiding guaranteeing women equality in rights, the Cairo Declaration obviously contemplates maintaining the *status quo*, affording a version of dignity that accommodates men's privileges and women's subordination. The rhetorical endorsement of women's equality in dignity in Article 6(a) demonstrates how the Cairo Declaration deploys dignity as a device to obscure its aim to construct a system that allows for maintaining a hierarchical order and the attendant restrictions on women's rights.

In Article 5 of the Cairo Declaration, the consequences of simultaneously upholding the superior status of Islam and the inferior status of women are manifest. In order to accommodate the Islamic rule that bars a Muslim woman from marrying a non-Muslim, in enumerating what kinds of restrictions on the right to marry are impermissible, the article deliberately fails to prohibit restrictions on marriage based on religion. It provides: 'Men and women have the right to marriage, and no restrictions stemming from race, colour or nationality shall prevent them from enjoying this right.' Because in Islamic law wives are subordinated to their husbands and are obligated to obey them, a Muslim woman marrying a non-Muslim man is seen as an affront to the dignity of Islam. Conversely, a Muslim man is allowed to marry a non-Muslim woman, because his superior rights as a husband accord with the superior dignity that should be accorded to Islam.

Once scrutinized, dignity as used in the Cairo Declaration is revealed to be a concept that embraces inequalities. It presupposes the superiority of Islam over other faiths and the retention of traditional understandings of Islamic law, viewed as mandating a hierarchy granting male Muslims superior rights and subjecting women and non-Muslims to discriminatory treatment.

#### **References**

- Johnston, David. 2007. 'Maqasid al-Shar ¯ ¯ı a: Epistemology and Hermeneutics of Muslim Theologies of Human Rights', *Die Welt des Islams* 47: 149–87
- Mayer, Ann Elizabeth. 2012. *Islam and Human Rights: Tradition and Politics*. 5th edn, Boulder, CO: Westview Press