

---

## Human dignity in Japanese law

SHIGENORI MATSUI

Respect for human dignity is one of the cornerstones of the Japanese legal system. As interpreted by modern scholars, the constitutional commitment to human dignity reflects the importance of respect for human rights and, in particular, the growing recognition of the need to make space for personal autonomy. However, the articulation of human dignity in Japanese law is far from complete, clear or straightforward. In some areas, the law still lags behind the modern understanding of human dignity.

This chapter starts by sketching the constitutional significance of human dignity and the extent to which Japan has embraced international human rights commitments. Some particular applications of this conjunction of human dignity and human rights are then given, before putting these developments in the context of a society that, traditionally, has a group orientation. The chapter continues with some remarks about the relationship between human dignity and Japan's modern pacifist stance; and it concludes with an indication of how human dignity applies in private law.

#### **Human dignity as the most foundational constitutional value**

Human dignity is generally believed to be the foundation of all fundamental human rights as protected by the Constitution of Japan (enacted in 1946) and the most foundational value of the constitutional order. Although there is no specific mention of human dignity in the Constitution, Article 13 provides that '[a]ll of the people shall be respected as individuals'; and Article 24 refers to 'individual dignity' when it provides that:

Marriage shall be based only on the mutual consent of both sexes and it shall be maintained through mutual cooperation with the equal rights of husband and wife as a basis. With regard to choice of spouse, property rights, inheritance, choice of domicile, divorce and other matters pertaining to marriage and the family, laws shall be enacted from the standpoint of individual dignity and the essential equality of the sexes.

The prevailing view among constitutional academics, represented by the late Toshiyoshi Miyazawa (1971: 213–14) and the late Nobuyoshi Ashibe (2011: 82), interprets these references as indicating the supremacy of individuals over the state or society, thus proclaiming individualism as the most fundamental constitutional principle. According to this view, these references demand that the government should respect each person as an individual human being, thus protecting human dignity as the most basic value.

The leading constitutional scholar Kouji Sato argues that every human being, having the ability to discipline himself or herself based on reason, has a right to personal autonomy. According to Sato, this right is the justification of human dignity and is the most foundational moral right that underlies all fundamental rights as protected by the Constitution (Sato 2011: 121). Despite some criticisms concerning the ambiguity of the concept of human dignity and the excessive emphasis on reason as the most important element for human dignity, Sato's work has been highly influential in shaping the prevailing view.

According to the prevailing view, the fundamental rights protected by the Constitution are to be understood as rights inherent in every human being, such rights deriving from human dignity and deserving protection even before the enactment of the Constitution. They are, thus, natural rights – not simply the creation of the Constitution – to be granted not only to Japanese citizens but also to non-citizens (subject to exceptions for voting and welfare rights).

#### **Protection of human rights**

The Constitution guarantees a range of individual rights, including the equality right, democratic rights (such as the right to vote), personal freedoms (such as freedom of thought and conscience, freedom of religion, freedom of expression and academic freedom), economic freedoms (such as occupational freedom and the right to property), social rights (such as the welfare right, the right to receive education and the rights of workers) and procedural rights (such as due process, the right of access to the courts and the rights of suspects and defendants during criminal proceedings). It is one of the most significant characteristics of the Japanese Constitution that it grants protection to social rights in addition to equality and freedoms in order to secure human dignity. The protection of social rights, especially the welfare right as provided for in Article 25, is rooted in the belief that human dignity requires that a government supports the minimum standard of healthy living.

These rights are all constitutionally protected and constrain the Diet (the national legislature), as well as all branches of government. The Diet can pass legislation restricting these rights in order to protect public welfare (see Articles 12 and 13 of the Constitution), but any restriction may be challenged before the courts, the courts having a power of judicial review to decide upon the constitutionality of the restrictions (see Article 81 of the Constitution).

Japan has also ratified a significant number of international human rights conventions, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the Convention Against Torture (CAT), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). However, Japan has not ratified some other important conventions, such as the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (MWC). In line with dualist theory, it has been assumed that international treaties and domestic law belong to different legal systems, with international treaties not being automatically enforceable as national law – they are enforceable in this way only when they have been transformed into domestic law by statutes passed by the Diet or if they are otherwise self-executing. Some of the international human rights conventions are regarded as self-executing and, therefore, could be invoked by individuals before the Japanese courts. However, Japanese courts are reluctant to interpret these conventions more broadly than the Constitution,1 as a result of which their domestic impact is limited.

#### **Some specific applications**

Article 18 of the Constitution prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude by providing that '[n]o person shall be held in bondage of any kind. Involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime, is prohibited.' Any slavery contract will be held to be invalid under section 90 of the Civil Code, which precludes juristic acts that are contrary to public order and good morals. Moreover, abduction or illegal confinement for human trafficking, as well as human trafficking itself, is prohibited by the Criminal Code.

Article 14 of the Constitution prohibits racial discrimination by protecting equality before the law. Yet, because there is no law which discriminates against a racial minority, there is no court decision on the legitimacy of racial discrimination. The Constitution does not have any provision on aboriginal people or on the protection of rights of aboriginal people. This gap in the Constitution has impacted on the indigenous Ainu, a people with their own language and culture. Because of the assimilation policy of past governments, the Ainu language and culture have been almost totally destroyed. Although the Ainu people are not granted any special rights or privileges as aboriginals, the government, having abandoned a policy of assimilation, now attempts to preserve their distinctive culture.

Similarly, the Constitution prohibits sexual discrimination. In the past, women were not granted the right to vote and were regarded as incompetent to manage property. Yet, under the Japanese Constitution, women are granted

<sup>1</sup> Supreme Court, Grand Bench, 8 March 1989, 43 *Minshu* 89.

a right to vote; and, under Japanese family law, which was completely rewritten after the Second World War in order to conform to the Constitution, women also have equal rights to men in the family. There still remains some sexual discrimination, such as a waiting period of six months after divorce before a *woman* (but only a woman) may remarry, and the Supreme Court has shown itself willing to uphold such discrimination.2

Although the Criminal Code prohibits abortion, the Women's Body Protection Act allows an artificial termination of a pregnancy when the pregnancy will present a danger to the life or health of the woman, and this requirement has been interpreted quite loosely to allow practically any abortion during the early stage of the pregnancy. The foetus is not regarded as a human being deserving human dignity under the Constitution and, therefore, there is no argument that liberalization of abortion is unconstitutional. Given that, in practice, early stage abortions are permitted, there is no serious attempt to challenge the constitutionality of the ban on abortion as an infringement of the woman's right to autonomy.

Human reproductive cloning is prohibited by the Act on Human Cloning. The Act, which prohibits the return of an embryo created by cloning technology to a woman's body, is based on concerns about safety as well as respect for human dignity. Some of those who assume that human reproductive cloning violates human dignity see this as a violation of Article 13 of the Constitution; however, precisely why human reproductive cloning violates human dignity is not crystal clear and some argue that the prohibition is justified only for safety reasons.

Despite the protection of human dignity, the Criminal Code imposes the death penalty on defendants who have committed certain serious crimes, such as murder, and the Supreme Court has upheld the constitutionality of capital punishment.3 While the Court conceded that ' . . . life is precious [and] [t]he value of one human being is more precious than the whole Earth', Article 13 of the Constitution assumes that even a life may be restricted for the public welfare and Article 31 assumes that a life may be taken in accordance with the law. The Supreme Court thus concluded that the Constitution permits the death penalty and that this is not a cruel punishment as prohibited by Article 36. Roughly ten to twenty defendants are sentenced to death each year. The method of execution is hanging. Although it is stipulated that the sentence must be carried out within six months of the final judgment, there is usually a delay of several years – some justice ministers refusing to sign the execution papers during their terms of office – and, in several cases, death row convicts have been retried and found not guilty after more than thirty years of confinement.

By contrast, the status of the right to die with dignity, that is, the right to withdrawal of life-sustaining support from patients, is not clear. Physicians

<sup>2</sup> Supreme Court, 3rd Petty Bench, 5 December 1995, 1563 *Hanreijihou* 81.

<sup>3</sup> Supreme Court, Grand Bench, 12 March 1948, 2 *Keishu* 191.

who remove such support, based on the wishes of the patient's family, might face prosecution for murder. Assisted suicide and killing with consent are both prohibited by the Criminal Code; mercy killing is not permitted in Japan. In the past, organ transplantation was seriously limited. Brain death was not legally recognized; it was only when brain-dead patients carried an organ donation card, and with the consent of the family, that physicians could lawfully remove organs for transplant. However, the conditions for lawful transplantation of organs have been significantly relaxed and now families may assent to donation even when no donation card was carried.

#### **Personal autonomy and Japanese society**

Despite the constitutional protection of human dignity, Japan is traditionally a group-orientated society, placing more emphasis on group harmony than respect for individual autonomy. When children enter elementary school, they are taught the necessity of maintaining the harmony of the class and of observing discipline. Many public junior high schools, as well as high schools, require students to wear uniforms as well as having strict dress and hair codes. When students graduate and enter into private companies, they will be trained to keep the harmony of the workplace and to maintain loyalty to the company. In Japanese society, everyone is taught to act and to behave just as others do. Those who stand out will be criticized (the nail that sticks out will be hammered in!).

In recent years, an increasing number of scholars have challenged this traditional emphasis on group conformity, arguing that the right to personal autonomy is constitutionally recognized in the form of the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness in accordance with Article 13. These scholars argue that the right to personal autonomy allows individuals to be different from one another and, therefore, the government should not force an individual to conform to the majority in private matters (Sato 2002). Most will agree that, at least, one has a right to personal autonomy with respect to private matters that are integral to personal development. However, some go further, arguing that one has a freedom to do whatever one likes so that restrictions on freedom should be judicially reviewed to assess whether they are reasonable and justified.

#### **Human dignity and pacifism**

Drawing on the experience of the Second World War, many Japanese people believe that war, with its creation of misery and inhuman deprivation of life, is the ultimate denial of human dignity. In its Preamble, the Japanese Constitution declares the necessity of world peace and it both renounces the war power (Article 9, section 1) and prohibits the maintenance of armed forces (Article 9, section 2). Many people believe that the effect of the Constitution is to prohibit government from engaging in war, even in self-defence, or maintaining armed forces for the purpose of self-defence. Human dignity, according to such a view, necessitates pacifism.

Nevertheless, when the Korean War erupted, the government was allowed to establish the National Police Reserve; and now it maintains the Self-Defence Force and allows the stationing of American military forces under the Japan– United States Mutual Security Treaty. According to the government, the Japanese Constitution never abandoned the right of self-defence as recognized in international society, from which it follows that the government is not precluded from maintaining the minimum force required to defend the country. The Self-Defence Force is such a minimum force and it does not fall within the terms of the Article 9 prohibitions.

#### **Human dignity in private law**

Article 2 of the Civil Code makes clear that private law 'must be construed in accordance with honouring the dignity of individuals and the essential equality of both sexes'. Moreover, private rights must conform to the public welfare and no abuse of rights is permitted (Article 1). Hence, any private contract that would violate human dignity would be found to violate public order and good morals (as per Article 90) and it would be held to be invalid. Any infringement of human dignity would also constitute a tort, and victims would be able to seek damages.

That said, the Constitution has been interpreted to apply only to governmental exercise of power and not to private individuals and corporations. Thus, the infringement of civil rights by a private individual or a corporation cannot be challenged as unconstitutional. Moreover, there is no comprehensive civil rights or human rights legislation that prohibits private discrimination or private infringement of civil rights – infringers can escape punishment and victims have no entitlement to civil redress. There is also no administrative tribunal or commission to regulate private discrimination or to give assistance to victims. Some of the most egregious acts of private discrimination, such as the mandatory retirement practice that forces women to retire at a younger age than men, have been found to violate public order and good morals.4 However, more subtle acts of discrimination have been tolerated. Past attempts to enact civil rights legislation have failed and the future prospects for enactment of new legislation are unclear.

Finally, it should also be said that there is no criminal ban on hate speech in Japan. Solicitation of racial hatred or wilful promotion of racial hatred is not subject to legal prohibition or penalty.

<sup>4</sup> Supreme Court, 3rd Petty Bench, 24 March 1981, 35 *Minshu* 300.

#### **References**

Ashibe, Nobuyoshi. 2011. *Kenpo* [Constitution]. 5th edn, Tokyo: Iwanami shoten Miyazawa, Toshiyoshi. 1971. *Kenpo II* [Constitution II]. New edn, Tokyo: Yuhikaku Sato, Koji. 2002. *Nihonkoukenpo to 'ho no shihai'* [Japanese Constitution and the Rule of

Law]. Tokyo: Yuhikaku

2011. *Nihonkoku kenporon* [Japanese Constitutional Law]. Tokyo: Seibundo