

---

### Human dignity and war

ANDREAS HASENCLEVER

#### **War as moral evil**

War as sustained combat between political communities is a moral evil (Walzer 2006; Levy and Thompson 2010). War signals the breakdown of law and order and develops a deadly dynamic of its own. Conflicts are no longer settled by moral reasoning, legal adjudication or political negotiation, but by wellorganized armed forces. War always goes along with death and destruction. Troops are moved strategically to overcome violent resistance and to defeat an enemy. As a rule, not only fighters are victimized on the battlefield, but entire societies suffer. The number of non-combatants dying from the direct and indirect consequences of sustained combat such as economic shortages, famines, displacement or disrupted healthcare and social security systems by far exceeds military casualties. Additionally, warfare goes along with the categorization, and, in most cases, dehumanization of opponents. Adversaries are no longer considered individual human beings but enemies who may be killed without further justification. Given the recent increase in ethnic conflicts, the traditional distinction between combatants and non-combatants blurs even further. War was never restricted to the battlefield, but today's wars more than ever target civilian populations. Depending on the severity of the fighting and the number of atrocities committed, it takes a generation or more to overcome the social disruptions of war and to re-establish a robust peace among former combatants and their successors.

Human dignity, by contrast, requires the peaceful settlements of disputes among as well as within societies (Gewirth 1996: 1–70; Steigleder 1999: 157– 75). Individuals and groups should be treated according to established human rights standards. They are entitled to life in peace and their legitimate interests should be protected by appropriate institutions. The distribution of rights and obligations within as well as among societies should be clearly specified and generally respected. In cases of transgression, a public authority should intervene to restore justice and to punish the offender if appropriate and reasonable. As such, the settlement of conflicts by well-recognized human right standards contradicts their settlement by the use of well-organized armed forces. In fact, human dignity requires the abrogation of war.

Even though war is a moral evil and should be avoided, throughout history respected scholars and practitioners maintain that under strict conditions war might be the lesser evil (Walzer 2006; Fisher 2011). In cases of external or internal aggression, victims might have a right to collective self-defence including the use of armed forces. Additionally, under certain circumstances third parties are entitled, if not required, to intervene militarily and to advance peace and justice. To decide whether war in fact should be considered the lesser evil a number of criteria have been developed which are summarized under the heading of the so-called 'just war tradition' (Rengger 2002).

In the following, I summarize the basic principles of the just war tradition. I argue that these principles are of a formal nature and that it is necessary to link them to a substantive conception of morality. In a second step, I elaborate on the emergence of human dignity and the corresponding human rights as core values of the international system. Finally, I discuss whether warfare might be under certain conditions an appropriate instrument to protect population from large-scale and systematic human rights violations. In my opinion this is rarely the case. While respect for human dignity entitles threatened persons to be rescued under conditions of mass atrocities, military intervention more often than not is inappropriate to sustainably improve the human rights record in the target region.

#### **Just war tradition**

Originally, the just war tradition comprises the *jus ad bellum* – the justification of why wars are fought – and the *jus in bello* – the question of how wars should be fought (Orend 2006; McMahan 2009). Most recently, scholars also discuss a *jus post bellum* addressing the obligations that arise for individual states or the international community after a war has been completed.

As to the *jus ad bellum*, most scholars working in the field agree on the following six formal criteria that should guide the decision to wage war. First, any just war presupposes a just cause. Armed forces should be used in cases of very grave injustice only. Second, the primary purpose of a war must be to stop wrongdoing and to advance peace and justice. Third, war must be the last resort. All other means to stop an aggressor are exhausted or could be considered inadequate. Fourth, there must be a reasonable chance of success to advance peace and justice by the use of force. Fifth, the expected benefits of war must outweigh its foreseeable costs. Finally, the decision to take up arms must be made by a legitimate authority. Just wars are waged for the common good only and should not result from private decision-making. The *jus in bello* adds two further criteria. First, non-combatants must not be targeted. If harm is done to civilians, this has to be the unintended consequence of an otherwise legitimate military move to defeat an unjust enemy. Second, force should be proportionate to the envisaged ends.

While the formal criteria that should guide the use of armed forces are widely accepted, their material content remains contested. What counts as a sufficiently grave injustice? How benign do intentions have to be to qualify the use of force as just? When is war the last resort? What counts as successful warfare and how to make up the moral balance of military interventions given the inevitable losses of life? It is evident that questions like these are far from settled. Remarkably, however, a strong and consistent normative trend has developed in international politics that puts human dignity at the center of the deliberation on the justification of warfare in general and humanitarian interventions in particular. As a result, it is not only foreign aggression that might be a just cause for the use of military force but also the large-scale and systematic violation of human rights on foreign territories.

#### **Responsibility to protect**

The adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) by the United Nations' General Assembly on 10 December 1948 marked the emergence of a global human rights regime based upon a strong notion of human dignity (Gewirth 1992; Donnelly 2002; Buergenthal 2006). As stated in Article 1 of the UDHR: 'All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.' Today, a dense and ever growing network of legal instruments and institutional mechanisms serve the protection of individual rights and liberties worldwide. As noted by the United Nations, all member states are party to at least one of the nine core international human rights treaties – the implementation of which is monitored by committees of independent experts – and 80 per cent are party to four or more. The broad recognition of the nine core treaties can be taken to indicate that human rights are firmly embedded within the normative fabric of the international community even though human rights practice is still very far from perfect.

Along with the emergence of human rights as core values of the international system, a *new understanding of sovereignty* developed (International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty 2001; Bellamy 2011). In cases of mass atrocities, international law no longer shields governments against outside scrutiny. By contrast, it is now widely recognized that states do have rights only insofar as they are instruments at the service of their people und do not systematically violate the dignity of the persons living under their jurisdiction. The new understanding of sovereignty is enshrined in the Outcome Document of the World Summit 2005. Accordingly, each state has a responsibility to protect its populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. When a state manifestly fails in this regard, the international community, through the Security Council, is entitled to use force to stop the wrongdoing should peaceful means be inadequate. Additionally, the members of the United Nations assume a responsibility to assist states after an armed conflict ends. For this purpose, the General Assembly together with the Security Council decided to create a Peacebuilding Commission in 2006.

Critics hold that the 'responsibility to protect' as articulated by the United Nations does not go far enough to make a real difference in international politics – calling it an 'R2P-lite' at best (Weiss 2007: 116–17). For instance, clear legal criteria guiding the use of force in emergency situations are still lacking. Similarly, the scope of the new principle remains highly controversial. What seems to be even more problematic is that, in its present form, the new principle is an imperfect obligation only. Although no state disputes that something should be done in case of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity, there is no indication who should take the initiative. Finally, the legal authority to decide on military interventions firmly rests with the Security Council. As a political body, however, the Security Council is too often paralyzed by the national interest of member states. Does this mean that a population at risk must stay without external protection as long as Security Council decision-making is blocked?

While it is evident that the responsibility to protect is not yet a valid norm of international law, it nevertheless amounts to a guiding principle of international morality. Large-scale and systematic human rights violations are equated to international aggression, and a state brutalizing its own populations effectively compromises its otherwise legitimate claim to territorial integrity and political independence. Human rights concerns might in fact override state rights in cases of grave humanitarian emergencies, and they also structure how third parties should proceed to save endangered populations.

#### **War for the protection of human rights?**

Let us assume that a government commits mass atrocities against its own people. Let us further assume that a military intervention would stop the killing, that enough troops are available and that the UN Security Council had already sanctioned their deployment under Chapter VII of the UN Charta. To justify a military intervention from a human rights perspective, however, two further requirements must be met: the use of force clearly has to be the lesser evil and the use of force must help to re-establish peace and justice on the affected territory. As to the first requirement, since warfare always kills non-combatants, it is still an open debate how to balance the benefits of military protection against the unavoidable loss of innocent life. On the one hand, proponents of the just war doctrine answered this question with reference to the so-called 'principle of double effect' (Orend 2006: 115–18; Walzer 2006: 153). To protect a population from mass atrocities, innocent civilians might be harmed if harm occurred as the unintended consequence of otherwise legitimate and necessary military activities. The benefits of the use of force, however, must clearly outweigh the collateral civilian casualties. Additionally, we should have strong reasons to believe that the beneficiaries of the intervention do prefer the risks that are associated with the deployment of troops over the continuation of the *status quo ante*. Or, as Teson ( ´ 2003: 121) has put it: 'Citizens of a state would ideally agree that humanitarian intervention should be allowed for extreme cases of injustice even at the cost of the deaths of some innocents, and even if some of those citizens will inevitably be those persons.'

On the other hand, a growing number of scholars doubt whether military necessity in fact has the power to override individual human rights even if the use of force serves to repel aggression and to restore justice (Fiala 2008; Hidalgo 2009). For them, any armed protection of endangered populations cannot be but tragic. Warfare always implies the loss of innocent life and it is hard to justify why some persons must die for other persons to be rescued. From this perspective, just war considerations ultimately rest on a consequentialist calculus even though this calculus is necessarily related to the human rights discourse and the entitlement of all persons to life in a 'community of rights' (Gewirth 1996). In cases of just wars, the creation of public goods and the defeat of a criminal government outweigh individual rights at least to the extent that the recognition and enjoyment of individual rights presuppose a well-ordered society. Therefore, it might be more appropriate not to focus on military necessity but on political necessity when it comes to decide to what extent force should be used in an emergency situation – if it might be used at all.

For the second condition to hold, warfare has to advance peace and justice. Fundamental human rights must be better protected after a just use of force than without it. While it is always possible to cite individual cases of success such as the outcome of the Second World War, most of the time warfare does not result in a decent and stable political order (Chenoweth and Stephan 2011; Wallensteen 2012). This is especially true for internal armed conflicts that represent the dominant form of contemporary warfare. First of all, recent research shows that civil resistance has a far better success record than armed struggle even under comparable conditions. Second, civil wars tend to recur. The risk of a new armed conflict after the settlement of an old one is desperately high. Moreover, the prospects of democracy after a civil war are very limited. This is also the case for military interventions with the explicit goal of advancing democracy in target countries. Similarly, military interventions tend to undermine the respect for core human rights in the target country. What is even more frustrating, the success rate of multilateral peace operations by the United Nations and other international organizations is far from satisfactory. While the prospects of stability are somewhat higher than in cases without a peace mission, the root causes of violence are rarely addressed, leading to so-called 'no war, no peace' situations (MacGinty 2010). As a consequence, not only are the odds for a new outbreaks of violence high, it also remains questionable whether the protection of human rights was enhanced to the degree necessary to justify the loss of innocent lives by the military operation.

Even though the track record of multilateral peace operations might be considerably improved by better funding and stronger leadership, until today the international community evidently lacks the political will to promote the necessary reforms. In the end, therefore, more and more scholars argue that the resources used for multilateral interventions might be better invested in development projects and the prevention of armed conflicts. By these means, the global human rights record might be better served than by the use of force. Given the tragic nature of military intervention, what counts in the end is the comparative advantage or disadvantage of the use of force for the provision of utterly needed public goods.

#### **Conclusion**

In principle, the use of armed forces to repel aggression and to protect endangered populations from mass atrocities can be morally justifiable within strict limits. The bar, however, is high if human dignity and the corresponding human rights are accepted as the guiding criteria. This is especially true for humanitarian interventions. While the genocides in Rwanda and Darfur cried for outside help that did not materialize, the experiences with those military interventions that did occur after the end of the Cold War are not encouraging. In most cases, they failed to accomplish their mission successfully. Either the civilian death toll was very high or the political situation on the ground remains unstable. Given both the prevalent reluctance among military powers to use their armed forces in clear cases of mass atrocities and the disappointing record of those missions that tried to advance peace and justice in war-torn societies, two lessons have to be drawn. First, the international community in general and the industrial countries in particular should increase their engagement for crisis prevention and the peaceful settlement of conflicts. Additionally, they should target the root cause of violence, namely, poor economic performance and bad governance. Second, the member states of the United Nations should make the world organization fit for successful military intervention when everything else has failed to protect endangered populations from mass atrocities. However, as long as there is no clear progress in both dimensions, it remains disputable whether powerful states really care for the responsibility to protect when they intervened militarily in armed conflicts beyond their borders – even if they maintain the contrary. In the final analysis, therefore, the principles of the just war tradition should be used more as a critical tool for the assessment of contemporary wars and military intervention than as an instrument to legitimize the use of force.

#### **References**

- Bellamy, A. J. 2011. *Global Politics and the Responsibility to Protect: From Words to Deeds*. London: Routledge
- Buergenthal, T. 2006. 'The Evolving International Human Rights System', *American Journal of International Law* 100(4): 783–807
- Chenoweth, E., and Stephan, M. J. 2011. *Why Civil Resistance Works: The Strategic Logic of Nonviolent Conflict*. New York: Columbia University Press
- Donnelly, J. 2002. *Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press
- Fiala, A. G. 2008. *The Just War Myth: The Moral Illusions of War*. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield
- Fisher, D. 2011. *Morality and War: Can War Be Just in the Twenty-First Century?*. Oxford University Press
- Gewirth, A. 1992. 'Human Dignity as the Basis of Rights', in M. J. Meyer and W. A. Parent (eds.), *The Constitution of Rights: Human Dignity and American Values*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 10–28

1996. *The Community of Rights*. University of Chicago Press

- Hidalgo, O. 2009. 'Der "Krieg" als Deus ex machina ein agnostizistisches Pladoyer', ¨ in I. Werkner and A. Liedhegener (eds.), *Gerechter Krieg – gerechter Frieden: Religionen und friedensethische Legitimationen in aktuellen milit¨arischen Konflikten*. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag, 83–109
- International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS). 2001. *The Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty*. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre
- Levy, J. S., and Thompson, W. R. 2010. *Causes of War*. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell
- MacGinty, R. 2010. 'No War, No Peace: Why So Many Peace Processes Fail to Deliver Peace', *International Politics* 47(2): 145–62
- McMahan, J. 2009. *Killing in War*. Oxford University Press
- Orend, B. 2006. *The Morality of War*. Peterborough (Ontario): Broadview Press
- Rengger, N. 2002. 'On the Just War Tradition in the Twenty-First Century', *International Affairs* 78(2): 353–63
- Steigleder, K. 1999. *Grundlegung der normativen Ethik: Der Ansatz von Alan Gewirth*. Freiburg im Breisgau, Munich: Alber
- Teson, F. R. ´ 2003. 'The Liberal Case for Humanitarian Intervention', in J. L. Holzgrefe and R. O. Keohane (eds.), *Humanitarian Intervention: Ethical, Legal, and Political Dilemmas*. Cambridge University Press, 93–129
- Wallensteen, P. 2012. *Understanding Conflict Resolution*. London, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
- Walzer, M. 2006. *Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical Illustrations*. New York: Basic Books
- Weiss, T. G. 2007. *Humanitarian Intervention: Ideas in Action*. Cambridge: Polity Press