

---

## Human dignity and prostitution

NORBERT CAMPAGNA

One of the major philosophical justifications for laws making sexual services (or the use of these) illegal is that prostitution is, intrinsically, a violation of human dignity, especially of the human dignity of women. Paying a person in order to accomplish a sexual act upon her or to have her accomplish a sexual act upon oneself is, so the argument runs, using her as a mere tool for sexual gratification, and this is so even if we suppose – what some claim to be impossible – that the person in question offers her sexual services voluntarily and without being forced or coerced. Consent may be transformative in many instances, but it cannot transform a prostitutional act into something compatible with human dignity, however well the client may treat the prostitute. Behind the humane treatment in the context of particular acts, one should always see the inhumane institution. In this sense, prostitution could be said to resemble slavery.

There is no denying the fact that prostitution as it exists nowadays is to a very large extent incompatible with respect for human dignity. Even before looking at the client who uses the prostitute for his sexual gratification, we must take account of all those people who use the prostitute as a source of revenue, keeping her under inhumane conditions, using violence against her whenever it pleases them, leaving her a very insubstantial part of what she receives from the clients, etc. Abducting a person, by force or by deceit, and then forcing her to prostitute herself is clearly contrary to human dignity and is rightly criminalized. And it can also be argued that clients who may be supposed to know that the prostitute is exploited can be criminalized.

But suppose a person – a man or a woman – freely decides to offer his or her sexual services for money. Some will object that such a person only exists in the mind of philosophers and that to evoke such a possibility will aid only those who already profit most from prostitution. For present purposes, however, the focal argument claims (1) since prostitution is contrary to human dignity and (2) since nobody is free to renounce his human dignity, then it must follow that nobody can freely decide to prostitute him- or herself.

The force of this logically valid argument depends on the strength of its premises. Its opponents may impugn either the truth of its first or that of its second premise. As to this second premise, nobody will deny the fact that we may actually do things which are contrary to our human dignity. But the premise does not state that we lack the physical possibility to do these things. It declares that we have the duty to do nothing that will give other persons the impression that we have abandoned our human dignity and, with this dignity, also the claim to have it respected. By giving him this impression, we delude the other person and ourselves by making us and him believe that we have abandoned something which we just cannot abandon – 'cannot' in a metaphysical sense.

Rather than discussing the question whether it is possible, in a metaphysical sense, to abandon our human dignity or the question whether we have a right to renounce our claim to have that dignity respected, I want to concentrate on the first premise of the argument in order to see whether prostitution intrinsically violates human dignity.

In order to answer this question, we need a definition of prostitution and a definition of human dignity. Some will define prostitution in such a way that it implicitly contains the idea of a violation of human dignity (for example, prostitution is sexual slavery), thus winning by an analytical knock-out. Defining prostitution in such a way that it does not yet contain any reference to a violation of human dignity will of course call forth the objection that one denies the facts – one does not define prostitution but something else.

Conscious that such an objection may be raised, I nevertheless want to give what I think to be a morally neutral definition of prostitution, or more precisely a definition of a prostitutional act: a prostitutional act – in the sexual sense of the word – is an act by which an individual exchanges a sexual service against something which is not sexual. In a pure prostitutional act, one person is not interested at all in her own sexual gratification. One person demands sexual gratification but is not expected to offer sexual gratification and the other person offers sexual gratification but is known not to demand it. What this other person demands must not necessarily be money, but can be such diverse things as a job, a meal, drugs, a child, a holiday, etc. What is important is that this person expects *something* in return and that this something is not sexual gratification.

At this point, one might object that prostitution is essentially a *public* phenomenon – isn't the female prostitute often called a 'public woman'? Though not denying the fact that prostitution is a social practice and thus a public phenomenon, the fundamental moral problem does not only appear at the public level. Performing prostitutional acts is not merely morally problematic when these acts are performed as a part of a public institution, but they are already problematic when performed at a private level. Performing them at a public level may add new morally problematic elements, but the fundamental problem already appears at the private level. Moreover, the very distinction between the public and the private is problematic. Having a mistress may be seen as belonging to the private sphere, but what if having a mistress is a social practice within a specific social group?

Performing a prostitutional act is not the same as becoming a prostitute, in the same way that performing a cooking act is not becoming a cook. A prostitute is a person who makes her living by engaging in prostitutional acts. In this context, one could distinguish the professional prostitute who makes her whole living by engaging in prostitutional acts and the occasional prostitute who engages in prostitutional acts only to supplement her income. According to my definition, a mistress who receives what she needs to live from her lover is a prostitute – at least if we suppose that she doesn't also expect sexual gratification from him. To be a prostitute, one need only fulfil one and a half of the elements mentioned by the Roman jurist Ulpianus: for money, without pleasure, with anybody. Having sex with anybody, i.e. not to be selective as to one's sexual partners, is called promiscuity, and though it is true that prostitutes are promiscuous, promiscuity does not, at least not in my thesis, belong to the essence of prostitution. The defining elements of prostitution are the absence of pleasure – in the sense that the prostitute does not seek sexual gratification – and receiving something non-sexual in exchange.

Is excluding promiscuity from our definition of prostitution not the trick which helps us evade the conclusion that prostitution is intrinsically a violation of human dignity? For what is a promiscuous person if not a person who accepts having sex with anybody, even with a person whom she knows will treat her like a mere thing? And is accepting being treated like a mere thing not announcing that one has renounced one's human dignity?

Promiscuity does not necessarily mean that one will perform sexual acts just with or for anybody. It just means that one does not limit one's sexual acts to one single person. A person may well be promiscuous and categorically refuse to perform sexual acts with or for a person whom she knows will treat her like a mere thing. So, even if we included promiscuity in our definition of prostitution, it would not commit us to the view that prostitution is intrinsically a violation of human dignity. It might, however, commit us to the view that prostitution is a violation of the dignity of sexuality – at least if we conceive of sexuality as an activity which is intrinsically monogamous.

A prostitutional act occurs each time a person exchanges a sexual act for something non-sexual. If we suppose that the mere fact of making oneself sexually available to another person does not yet constitute a declaration that one renounces one's human dignity – as Kant would have us suppose, at least in the absence of a valid marriage contract – the violation of human dignity must somehow be linked to the fact that one does not expect the other person to make him- or herself also sexually available to us. The ethical problem of prostitution, at least insofar as human dignity is concerned, must lie in this asymmetry.

But could it not already lie in one's making one's body available to another person? If we suppose that one's person is intrinsically linked to one's body and that making one's person available is just what constitutes a violation of human dignity, making one's body available would also constitute such a violation.

One thing to be said here is that the prostitute does not sell his or her body. It does of course happen that criminal organizations sell prostitutes in the same way slaves were sold – and are still sold in some countries. But there is a difference between a criminal who sells a prostitute to a pimp and an independently working prostitute who asks money for sexual services. The client does not buy a body, but the right to ask for sexual services from the prostitute. What some persons provide out of love, what is taken by force from some other persons, prostitutes provide for money.

Of course, in a loving relationship lovers get much more than just sexual gratification. For them, sexuality is also a means of communicating their mutual love to each other; it is one of the many ways they have to feel close to each other, etc. All these related aspects are absent from a prostitutional relationship and they are also generally expected to be absent. In this sense, one can say that prostitutional sex is an impoverished form of sexuality. But this judgment has more to do with aesthetics than with ethics, and even if we suppose that it has something to do with ethics, it belongs more to the realm of recommended ideals than to the realm of obligatory norms. We may be encouraged to pursue a richer form of sexuality, but I strongly doubt that we may be obliged to pursue it.

As was said before, the question whether prostitution intrinsically violates human dignity presupposes a definition of prostitution and a definition of human dignity. So after having said what constitutes a prostitutional act, we must now turn to the question of what constitutes human dignity. And the first thing to notice is that we are concerned with *human* dignity and not merely with *status* dignity. Yet status dignity can give us a clue as to how to find our way to a definition of human dignity. For status dignity is defined by a certain number of expectations, and the person who does not live up to these expectations shows that she doesn't merit the social status she has.

Hence the question is: what do we expect from a human being as a *human* being? It should be clear from the outset that these expectations will not just be biological expectations, but that they will refer to elements which distinguish human beings and which give them their value. If we place ourselves in the Kantian tradition (and this tradition is predominant today, at least in continental Europe), what gives us our value is our autonomy, i.e. our ability to give ourselves our own law of action. Hence Kant's categorical imperative which urges us not to treat humanity, either in ourselves or in others, merely as a means, but always also as an end in itself. This means that we should never forget that human beings can and should determine by themselves the laws which will guide their actions. And, for Kant, this capacity is linked to reason. Respecting human dignity is respecting the capacity to decide for oneself, following one's reason, how one is going to act.

For Kant, submitting oneself to the sexual desire of another is giving him to understand that one accepts being his tool for sexual gratification, so that the other stops seeing in that person an end in itself and so a being capable to decide for itself. It is as if a human being became an inflatable doll. In order to escape this fate, according to Kant, the person who submits herself to sexual intercourse must first contract with the other person, the core of the contract being that the two persons bind themselves for life, so that whatever consequences will follow from their sexual intercourse – pregnancy, diseases, etc. – they will have to bear them together, in the sense that neither can discard the other as he would discard a lemon out of which he has taken all the juice.

In the case of prostitution, the client can discard the prostitute after he has obtained his sexual gratification. No legal duty obliges him to care for the person he may have made pregnant or who may have caught a venereal disease because he was infected. And the prostitute has sold her right not to be treated like a used lemon. She has engaged in a potentially dangerous act without caring to establish any legal duties, so as to give the impression that her moral rights count for nothing. Insofar as the wife secures the respect of her fundamental moral rights by binding her husband to legal duties, nothing similar happens in the case of the prostitute. And, because he pays her, the client may get the impression that he has bought himself out of the duty to respect the prostitute. The prostitute has sold her right to be respected as a human being, and the client has bought the right not to respect her as a human being.

It may be the case that many clients think that things are like this. And the cultural and legal stigmatization of prostitution may comfort them in what they think. But there is no reason why the relation between a client and a prostitute should be interpreted in this way. The fact that nowadays many legal systems admit the legal possibility of raping a prostitute clearly shows that the prostitute should not be understood as having sold all her rights. Moreover, 'traditional' prostitutes have what may be called their own code of deontology: there are some sexual acts which they refuse to do, many never consent to be kissed on the mouth, etc. Even though these prostitutes sell a right to be made use of for the sexual gratification of another person, they do not sell all their rights, nor does the law allow the client to think that they have sold all their rights.

So, even if we suppose that a client uses a prostitute's body to obtain his sexual gratification and pays her for this, this does not necessarily mean that he treats her as a mere instrument. Whether one treats someone as a mere instrument or also as an end in itself does not depend on what one physically does to that person or have her do, but on how one considers her. The respect for human dignity does not express itself in the substance of the act, but in the modality of its accomplishment.

But aren't there exceptions and doesn't prostitution belong to these? The most obvious exceptions are genocide and torture. Even if one decides to wipe out a people without causing suffering to a single individual and if one does it with the sincere belief that it will secure the eternal salvation of those individuals, it will be hard to say that the genocidal act is compatible with human dignity. Some types of act just cannot be accomplished in a way that respects human dignity because their very substance negates it.

I do not think that prostitution belongs to these exceptions. There is no compelling reason to think that a person making use of a prostitute for his sexual gratification necessarily stops respecting her as the person she is, a person worthy of respect which one may not treat as one wishes and whom one is bound to by moral as well as legal duties. By having paid intercourse with her, one does not implicitly negate what morality exhorts us to respect. There is no contradiction in saying: 'I pay you for the sexual act and I respect you as a human being.'

Of course, if one knows or has good reasons to believe that the other person is disgusted by the idea of being paid for giving sexual gratification – something she believes she should only offer in the context of a true love affair – and that she consents to sell what according to her has no price, paying her for a sexual act can be morally condemnable. And here seems to lie the crux of the problem: while some think that any human being conscious of his human dignity *should* feel disgusted or morally horrified at the idea of selling sexual gratification, others think that a human being who does not feel disgust or moral horror at this idea may still be conscious of his human dignity. Sexuality seems to be so intimately linked to our humanity, that selling/buying sexual gratification seems to be selling/buying one essential ingredient of one's/the other's humanity and thus treating the latter as a mere means. Sexuality, some – but not Kant, of course – may be tempted to say, is an end in itself and cannot be anything but an end in itself. And, as such, it should be out of commerce. For if it is commercialized, it will be reduced to a merchandize or a service, like any other. But wasn't this kind of objection once made against the selling of philosophical knowledge?

What has been said does not exclude the possibility of condemning forced prostitution and human trafficking. As it now exists, the social institution of prostitution is highly problematic and in many instances morally condemnable. I do not deny that a large part of this institution is controlled by criminal groups and that many clients consider prostitutes as mere objects for their sexual gratification. But morally condemning the – nowadays – paradigmatic form of institutional prostitution implies neither a condemnation of prostitution as such nor the condemnation of all possible institutional forms of prostitution. The Netherlands or Germany have decided to consider prostitution as a legally recognized profession. Of course, such a legal recognition does not in itself mean that prostitutes will be respected. For this to happen, an important cultural change concerning our views of sexuality and the persons selling sexual services must occur.

One of the major moral-legal problems confronting legislators today is the following: once we admit that many prostitutes are exploited and treated as mere objects, should one, like some Scandinavian countries, make laws aimed at criminalizing the buying of sexual services – though not the selling, as prostitutes are seen as victims – or should one make laws giving more rights to prostitutes, thus officially recognizing prostitution? At a more fundamental level, two opposite views confront each other: on the one hand, the view that prostitution must disappear as it is fundamentally incompatible with human dignity. And, on the other hand, the view that only *forced* prostitution must disappear. And, among those who merely hold that forced prostitution must disappear, we find those who think that the only means to get rid of forced prostitution is to criminalize the buying of sexual services as such and those who think that one can get rid of forced prostitution without a wholesale criminalization of the buying of sexual services.

#### **References**

- Assemblee´ Nationale (ed.). 2011. *Rapport d'information 3334: Prostitution: l'exigence de responsabilit´e: En finir avec le mythe du 'plus vieux m´etier du monde'*, Paris
- Campagna, N. 2005. *Prostitution: Eine philosophische Untersuchung*. Berlin: Parerga 2008. *Prostitution et dignit´e*. Paris: La Musardine
- De Marneffe, P. 2010. *Liberalism and Prostitution*. Oxford University Press
- Jeffreys, S. 1997. *The Idea of Prostitution*, Melbourne: Spinifex
- Mathieu, L. 2001. *Mobilizations de prostitu´ees*. Paris: Belin
- O'Neill, M. 2001. *Prostitution and Feminism: Towards a Politics of Feeling*. Cambridge: Polity Press
- Outshoorn, J. (ed.). 2004. *The Politics of Prostitution: Women's Movements, Democratic States and the Globalization of Sex Commerce*. Cambridge University Press
- Pryen, S. 1999. *Stigmate et m´etier: Une approche sociologique de la prostitution de rue*. Presses Universitaires de Rennes
- Rossiaud, J. 2010. *Amours v´enales: La prostitution en Occident XIIe–XVIe si`ecles*. Paris: Aubier
- Zelizer, V. A. 2005. *The Purchase of Intimacy*. Princeton University Press