

---

### Human dignity as a concept for the economy

ELIZABETH ANDERSON

#### **Two roles of dignity**

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) affirms three types of universal economic rights. One concerns secure *access to resources*: everyone has a right to property (Article 17), including intellectual property (Article 27), to a decent standard of living (Article 25), to social security in case of accident, illness, disability, unemployment, widowhood and old age (Articles 22 and 25) and free education (Article 26). A second set of rights concern *work*: everyone has a right to work, to join a labour union, to a free choice of occupation, a just wage, equal pay for equal work, decent conditions of work (Article 23), and to limited working hours and paid holidays (Article 24). A third set of economic rights *protect the vulnerable from specific injustices*: everyone has a right against slavery and servitude (Article 4) and against discrimination on the basis of their race, gender, or other social identities (Articles 2 and 23). These economic rights are supposed to be specially connected to the dignity of human beings. What conception of dignity is capable of supporting the UDHR's list of economic rights?

Any such conception must support the two roles played by dignity in the UDHR and in its implementing Covenants, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), which altogether comprise the International Bill of Human Rights (IBHR). First, at the start of these documents, dignity serves as a *foundation* for universal human rights in general. The UDHR only suggests this association in its Preamble (recognizing the 'inherent dignity' and 'equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family') and Article 1 (declaring all human beings 'equal in dignity and rights'). It is explicit in the Preambles to the ICCPR and ICESCR: 'these rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person'. Second, in later provisions of these documents, dignity figures in the *content* of specific human rights. Article 22 of the UDHR affirms that everyone has 'the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity'. Article 23 affirms a right to a wage and other social protections sufficient for 'an existence worthy of human dignity' on the part of the worker and his family. Article 13 of the ICESCR declares that everyone has a right to an education that is 'directed to the full development of the human personality and the sense of its dignity'. This dual role of dignity – as the foundation of all human rights and as the content of some – calls for explication and justification.

Start with the foundational question. The concept of dignity refers to a kind of worth or value said to be inherent in human beings and a ground of rights. It is tempting to define a person's dignity simply as a person's being a bearer of rights. Joel Feinberg has expressed this thought as follows:

[W]hat is called 'human dignity' may simply be the recognizable capacity to assert claims. To respect a person, then, or to think of him as possessed of human dignity simply is to think of him as a potential maker of claims. (Feinberg 1980: 151)

If dignity is simply a way of referring to the status of being a rights-bearer, then it cannot serve as a *foundation* from which all human rights can be derived. It could serve a foundational role only if it referred to whatever human features possess the sort of value that *grounds* everyone's status as a rights-bearer. I shall leave it to the authors of Part I of this volume to explore this issue.

Some philosophers argue that the characteristics that are supposed to ground this status of being a rights-bearer could generate a full and rich set of rights. For example, neo-Kantian approaches to human rights attempt to derive substantive rights from the features of rational agency – from what we must necessarily will, given that we are also animals who live on Earth (Herman 1993; Korsgaard 1996). Whatever the merits of this approach – and I have doubts about its ability to generate more than a minimal set of rights – it leaves behind the concept of dignity quickly, or appropriates the term 'dignity' to label a set of ideas about the requirements of practical reason that could get along fine without that term.

#### **A genealogical approach to dignity**

I suggest that, if we want to give the idea of dignity some real normative work in a theory of human rights, we take a genealogical approach: we can give distinctive content to the idea of dignity by considering what people originally meant by it and how current usage reflects those origins. This will facilitate reflection on whether and how it remains a compelling normative idea in modern life. Once we know what dignity demands, we can see whether those who live in societies governed by this ideal have favourable experiences of living dignified lives. Kant is a pivotal figure in the ethics of dignity. A genealogical approach to Kant suggests that his ethics of dignity is a universalized form of an ethics of honour (Anderson 2008). An honour ethic focuses on the entitlements, bearing, and regard owed to *dignitaries* – persons of high social status who occupy, or are deemed worthy to occupy, positions of command in a hierarchical society. Traditionally, these have been persons such as patriarchal heads of families, tribal and clan leaders, military officers, monarchs, aristocrats and feudal lords. Honour or dignity denotes a superiority of status, recognition and esteem that those in command enjoy over those who are commanded (Anderson 2008: 136). Kant's moral revolution, prefigured by Rousseau (1762) was to universalize dignified standing to all human beings: to eliminate the lower ranks, and elevate all to the same entitlements as dignitaries enjoyed.

This was not a revolution in thought alone. Centuries of struggle have made it a revolution in practice. Politically, the upshot of recognizing that all are entitled to a share in command is democracy. In criminal law, European states committed to this universalizing moral vision took the entitlements granted to nobles in criminal procedure and punishment as the baseline for dignified treatment – for treatment as a dignitary or honourable person – and extended them to all (Whitman 2003). Jeremy Waldron (2009) argues that this logic generalizes across all practical domains in which the concept of dignity has figured in modern times: take as a model the entitlements and incidents of high social status, and secure for everyone whatever can be universalized on an equal basis within that model. Not just nobles, but all are entitled to 'a trial by their peers'. Every man in his home is 'a king in his castle'.

This genealogical approach to dignity must meet three challenges for it to be applicable in the economic realm. First, it must be able to account for the three types of economic rights in the UDHR. Second, it must be able to explain how dignity can serve as a foundation for rights, while also figuring in the content of certain specific rights. Third, it must answer the challenge of parochiality. It seems too culture-bound and contingent a basis for a universal system of rights to generalize from a conception of dignity and its incidents originally found in European aristocracy.

The key to addressing these challenges is to cut through the contingent expressions of dignity that are culture-bound to their general underlying normative concerns. Here, I stress three normative ideas traditionally associated with the dignity of those of high social status: authority, dignified bearing, and an entitlement to displays of respect from others. These ideas were sharpened by contrast with the normative ideas associated with those of low social status.

First, dignity involves commanding authority. To have dignity entails having the authority to command others to act or refrain from acting, and to hold them accountable for their conduct. It entails having a voice in decision-making, being entitled to speak for oneself and to demand reasons for complying with others' requests. Beings of lower rank have none of these attributes. Like animals, they might be bent to the will of others by goading or prodding. Or as servants, they may simply be ordered to do things. No reasons need be offered to get them to do what commanding authorities want them to do. Second, dignity involves dignified bearing or conduct. Dignified persons stand erect, hold their heads high, address demands to others with a confident sense of their own entitlements, and manifest pride in their appearance and conduct. Lowly persons bow and scrape, beg and wheedle, and humble themselves before their superiors. Third, dignified persons are the objects of others' respect. Others take their entitlements as normally conclusive reasons for action, address them with honourable titles, and manifest respect by obeying other norms of civility towards them. Lowly persons are treated with contempt.

It is not difficult to universalize the second and third aspects of dignity. Social norms can prescribe the same modes of dignified bearing and polite conduct for all. To universalize commanding authority, its scope must be restricted so that each person has an equivalent domain over which they can exercise it. This is the domain of universal individual *rights*. Each has the final say in matters concerning himself, may demand that others constrain their actions to respect those rights, and hold them accountable for failure to do so. By contrast, in an ideal-typical honour-based society, while dignitaries may have duties to their inferiors (*noblesse oblige*), such duties are not matched by corresponding rights on the part of inferiors to exact compliance from their superiors, or to hold their superiors accountable. The *dignity* of honourable social standing consists in such entitlements to exact compliance and hold people accountable.

This is the source of the idea that human dignity is the ground of rights in general. To have a dignified status is, in part, to be a rights-bearer, as Feinberg asserts above. One might object that such a conception of dignity as being a rights-bearer is empty in that it entails no particular rights. However, if dignity is inherent in individuals, then the moral status of being a rights-bearer is inalienable. This is incompatible with certain kinds of social status that are defined by the condition of *lacking* any rights – the slave, the outlaw, the exile, the pariah. At a minimum, then, the UDHR implies that such social statuses should be abolished. Hence, slavery must be prohibited (Article 4) and everyone recognized as a legal person (Article 6).

#### **Dignity and economic rights**

Turn now to the economic sphere. As noted above, Article 22 of the UDHR declares that everyone has 'the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity'. This is the key to understanding the rest of the specific economic rights in the UDHR: rights to resources, rights concerning work, and protections against discrimination and servitude. Economic rights are instrumental to securing the three dimensions of dignity: being a bearer of effective rights, being able to conduct oneself in a dignified manner, and eliciting respect from others. They are, in part, responses to human social psychology. Clothing, food, shelter and the like are not merely means of subsistence. Particular types of possessions or the lack thereof mark their owners as elevated or demeaned in status. To be deprived of the right to own property at all, to have access only to food deemed within one's culture as fit for animals, to lack the privacy afforded by shelter and thus be reduced to defecating in public – such lacks mark a person as contemptible. They elicit shame and humiliation in the person suffering from them, and mockery and abuse from others. People also need resources to vindicate their other rights. Public authorities and private parties alike systematically ignore or violate the rights of the destitute, who cannot afford lawyers or other representatives to get their rights vindicated in court. This is why the level of resources guaranteed by Article 23 of the UDHR is not merely what people need to survive, but to enjoy 'an existence worthy of human dignity'. Since not everyone can attain this level of resources through work, individuals need the protections of social security in case of unemployment, disability, old age, illness and loss of a family's primary wage earner to ensure that they can maintain a dignified level of consumption (Article 25).

Work is a domain in which people are especially vulnerable to loss of dignity. In most cultures, unemployment (at least for those who are not independently wealthy) is not merely a threat to survival but a mark of shame. Hence, people need a right to work and effective access to work to be able to bear themselves with dignity and not be reduced to begging or living at the mercy of others. Since most occupations involve cooperation under the supervision of superiors, special rights are needed to ensure that workers are not treated in a contemptible manner like beasts of burden or mere tools, but are treated with respect and able to conduct themselves with the dignity that befits persons with 'reason and conscience' (Article 1). The right to join a labour union (Article 23) helps secure workers' voices over the terms and conditions of their work. The rights to enjoy safe and decent conditions of work (Article 23) and to have limited working hours (Article 24) mark their bearers as respectable human beings, not mere tools that may be used until they wear out.

Finally, the UDHR recognizes certain economic rights to protect the vulnerable against reduction to a despised, stigmatized, undignified status. Desperate people would find themselves unable to resist contracts into servitude if this were not prohibited (Article 4). Human societies tend to construct social inequalities along lines of social identity such as race, religion, ethnicity and gender, marking privileged identities as respectable and the others as contemptible. Rights against discrimination on the basis of such identities (Articles 2 and 23) are needed to prevent and dismantle such hierarchies.

Thus, the genealogical approach to dignity, once abstracted to its fundamental normative elements (normative authority to make demands on others, capacity for dignified bearing, eliciting respectful treatment from others) and universalized to all, can answer all three challenges posed to founding economic rights on the basis of dignity. First, specificity: the economic rights enumerated in the UDHR can be rationalized as necessary to enable people to vindicate their other rights, to live a dignified life and/or to elicit respectful treatment from others or deter degrading treatment. Second, parochiality: while no specific types of clothing, food and so forth are pan-culturally recognized as worthy of a dignified existence, within any society it is possible to identify a level of access to resources below which a person's ability to live in a fashion recognized as dignified is threatened. The universal right to a dignified level of resources makes room for cultural variation without tying itself to any single parochial standard. Third, dignity as both a foundation of rights in general and the content of specific rights: the most important normative idea tied to dignitaries is that they are rights-bearers; the assertion of universal dignity thus claims that whatever entitles dignitaries to such a status grounds an equal status for all and so grounds rights in general. At the same time, the economic rights *explicitly* tied to dignity in the UDHR are those connected to the second and third aspects of dignity – dignified bearing, and respectful treatment by others. Here, the specifically symbolic, expressive aspects of dignity are stressed: the importance of having command over enough resources, and enough selfcommand, to appear in public without shame and to elicit respectful treatment from others.

The upshot of this analysis is that the concept of dignity in the UDHR includes a plurality of normative concerns. Only so would it be able to play the rich and varied roles the UDHR makes it play in a theory of human rights. What unifies the concept of dignity is not a single normative idea, but rather a history of practice in which certain persons enjoyed a unified bundle of goods. What makes it relevant for the modern world is the possibility of extending access to that bundle of goods to all persons. What makes it normatively compelling is a set of facts: (1) that persons experience their lives as improved when they enjoy secure access to this bundle of goods; (2) that we have enough experience with forging dignitary practices to be confident that access to this bundle can be universalized; and (3) that no arguments for denying access to this bundle to subordinated groups on the basis of their supposed intrinsic inferiority survive critical scrutiny.

#### **References**

- Anderson, E. 2008. 'Emotions in Kant's Later Moral Philosophy: Honor and the Phenomenology of Moral Value', in *Kant's Virtue Ethics*, ed. M. Betzler. New York, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 123–45
- Feinberg, J. 1980. 'The Nature and Value of Rights', in *Rights, Justice and the Bounds of Liberty*. Princeton University Press
- Herman, B. 1993. *The Practice of Moral Judgment*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Korsgaard, C. M. 1996. *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*. Cambridge University Press
- Rousseau, J.-J. 1762. *The Social Contract*, trans. G. D. H. Cole. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books
- Waldron, J. 2009. *Dignity, Rank and Rights*. Tanner Lectures on Human Values. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press
- Whitman, J. Q. 2003. *Harsh Justice: Criminal Punishment and the Widening Divide Between America and Europe*. Oxford University Press