

---

### Human dignity and gender inequalities ANNIKA THIEM

A particular challenge of considering human dignity and gender inequalities together lies in the fact that discussions about gender inequalities rarely make any reference to human dignity.1 Another difficulty arises from the expansiveness and variegated nature of the category of 'gender inequalities'. As groups, women and gender minorities still face inequalities in many areas of daily life, but the institutional, social, material and psychological aspects of these inequalities differ greatly among various geographical, economic and cultural contexts. 'Gender' as a category of difference and a basis for unequal treatment cannot and should not be reduced to mean only women, but the debates, especially in the context of international human rights, have to date focused almost entirely on women's rights and women's empowerment, leaving gender minorities in the margins. Yet while human dignity and gender inequalities have seldom been discussed in connection with each other, the perspective of gender can offer a critical heuristic to examine how appeals to dignity might implicitly and inadvertently reinscribe norms of gender, race, class, ableness, sex and sexuality. With this critical perspective in place, dignity as a philosophical concept can be productive in a feminist context to foreground the relation among social respect, self-respect and agency as central to ongoing emancipatory struggles (cf. Cornell 2002). Laying claim to one's dignity, regardless of one's gender, can attain the force of a critical moral act, particularly in situations where individuals are socially, culturally or politically denied the freedom of enacting a moral vision of themselves and the world. Just as the full enactment and experience of one's own dignity requires social respect, social respect without self-respect remains a limited actualization of an individual's human dignity. To the extent that it is useful to approach gender inequalities as infringements on individuals' human dignity, abolishing inequalities requires social and

1 See, for instance, Lorber 2010; Krook and Childs 2010. Exceptions are considerations of gender in discussions about biomedical ethics and violence against women, where human dignity plays an important theoretical role. However, these discussions tend to invoke dignity in the context of bodily and mental violations and integrity rather than in the context of a broader set of gender-based social, legal, political and cultural inequalities.

cultural changes alongside legal, political and economic advances. To circumscribe the relationship between human dignity and gender inequalities, this chapter will first consider key United Nations (UN) documents to trace the conceptual expansion in the treatment of gender issues from that of equal rights and the protection of individuals from violence to a broader agenda of women's empowerment. The second part of the chapter will outline the conceptual difficulties in drawing on the concept of human dignity in the struggle to overcome gender inequalities.

#### **From universal human rights to women's empowerment: historical considerations**

The development of international support for gender-specific women's human rights in the context of the UN takes as its first point of departure the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) of 1948. Following a Preamble that grounds universal human rights in the fundamental affirmation of the inherent dignity of all humans, the subsequent articles substantiate and elaborate this commitment. The UDHR explicitly mentions men *and women* in only two articles, which address marriage and motherhood. Otherwise, discussions surrounding the formulation of the UDHR converged to agree that the category of 'the human' was sufficiently gender-inclusive and that gender distinctions should consciously not be made in the general elaboration of human rights.

In the following years, UN member states conceded that the economic and social realities of women's daily lives and the special hardships that women face were not sufficiently grasped by the gender-neutral language of the UDHR.2 To address the gendered dimension of discrimination in particular, the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women in 1967, which led to the approval of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1979 and its entry into force in 1981. Moving beyond formal legal and political equality, the CEDAW also differentiates aspects of social, public and private equality to emphasize the importance of access for women to education, healthcare and economic means. Resulting from the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995, 3 the Beijing Platform for Action for Equality, Development and Peace spells out twelve areas for action, detailing especially gender-specific needs with respect to health, education, poverty and access to

2 On the evolution of human rights instruments at the UN, see Quataert 2009. Reilly 2009 discusses the development of women's human rights and feminist critiques.

3 The conference in Beijing was preceded by the UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (1993) and the World Conference on Human Rights (1994), which also attended to the connection between gender issues and children's and indigenous peoples' rights.

economic resources, but also adding sections on the environment, on women and peace, on women and the media and on the young girl in order to analyze and redress the dimensions of gender inequalities in a more comprehensive and fine-grained manner. The Platform also emphasizes the importance of developing institutional mechanisms and forms of cooperation between governmental and non-governmental organizations to reduce gender inequalities systematically. During the conference and in the dissenting comments on the Platform, the governmental representatives of many Islamic and Catholic countries, along with the United States and the Holy See, mounted a very vocal opposition to the Platform's endorsement of women's reproductive freedom. As a result of this very public disagreement, discussions around the Beijing conference – and, by implication, issues of gender equality – have often been perceived as crucially focused on women's health and especially women's reproductive health, even though the Platform documents a much more comprehensive approach.

Security Council Resolution 1325, approved in 2000, marks a further shift, as it focuses on the role of women in politics, outlining the importance of involving women in conflict resolution and in security and peace measures. Resolution 1325 emphasizes the inclusion of a gender perspective in assessing the implications of armed conflicts and lays out programs on gender, peace and security to promote equal training and professional involvement of women and men in peace-building missions and to counter one-dimensional gender perspectives that view women solely as victims of male violence in conflicts. Taking up the focus on women's involvement and empowerment, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) address the continued gender differential in education, poverty reduction, care-giving to the young, sick, and elderly, and access to paid formal employment and to top-level positions in the private and political sectors. Moreover, the MDGs take a strong stance on the link between legal and regulatory measures and the need for cultural change by emphasizing the cultural success of quotas, where they have been implemented, and the importance of special measures to transform cultural perceptions of leadership and women's roles as leaders.

Over the course of the more than forty years since the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women was adopted, the UN discourse on gender inequalities has expanded from the early efforts to institute legal international instruments to assert the equal rights of women to a focus on implementing practices of empowerment. From the late 1990s on and especially in the 2000s, the UN women's divisions' emphasis has moved to ensuring the collection of gender-disaggregated data, the allocation of funds for gender mainstreaming, and the implementation of mechanisms for accountability. Equally, while violence – often extreme violence – against women and girls remains an urgent issue (not so much of gender inequality, but of gender discrimination), it is clear that discussions and programs have moved from considering women in the first place as needing special protection to considering women as partners in the process of their empowerment.

Among the continued challenges in greater progress towards women's empowerment remains the current emphasis on micro-economics (for example, micro-loans) at the expense of macro-economic policies that take a gender perspective into account (UN General Assembly 2009). To boost efforts, current UN documents identify as further priorities strengthening governments' cooperation with civil society and increasing data collection, especially data more thoroughly disaggregated according to sex, age, race, ethnicity, socio-economics and ability. Finally, most recent reports begin to emphasize the need for men's greater involvement in efforts towards women's empowerment and participation in the reworking of the cultural understanding of masculinity and men's roles.

#### **Gendered dignity and its discontents: theoretical reflections**

Canvassing the development of the discourse on gender inequalities and the means of redress within the UN context reveals rather strikingly that human dignity as a key concept is mostly absent from these discussions. In ethical and political discussions of gender issues, human dignity tends to appear frequently in discussion on biomedical ethics and on extreme violence against women.4 In debates on gender inequalities as part of the broader set of problems being addressed in feminist and queer political theory, human dignity plays no significant conceptual role. However, the sparseness of references to dignity within this debate is instructive, insofar as it signals the difficulties inherent in appealing to human dignity as a philosophical resource in the context of overcoming gender inequalities. This section will address two problematics, namely (1) invoking dignity as inadvertently abetting traditional gender regimes and privileges and (2) reducing gender inequalities to a women's issue, and will conclude by suggesting what a gender perspective adds to considerations on human dignity.

#### Invoking dignity as inadvertently abetting traditional gender regimes

UN debates and documents on gender equality invoke human dignity in two ways. The few times when the term 'dignity' appears in the main texts of the documents, the concept is cited in order to establish the equal rights of women and men and to give texture to practices of equality that enact reciprocal respect and self-respect to strengthen mutual, equal partnerships between the genders. That said, in the UN documentation on women's rights and empowerment, the dignity of women tends to be more often explicitly invoked by states to reaffirm rather than to tackle existing gender norms. In reports on their own

4 Further exceptions are discussions of *Menschenw¨urde* (human dignity) especially with respect to German constitutional law; see Baer 2009: 417–68.

progress towards establishing women's rights, some states comment on their commitment to protecting women's dignity, by, for instance, focusing on banning images of women that could be construed as pornographic. At the same time, these states tend to ignore the broader platform that calls for women to assume positions of public leadership, also in the media, and for representations of women in a variety of roles and responsibilities to highlight their contribution at all levels in all sectors of society.5 In this context, the references to dignity ground a position that ends up thwarting rather than furthering women's equality with men because the substantive interpretation of women's dignity reasserts a lopsided understanding of dignity as primarily concerned with protecting women and their bodies from exploitation, a focus that in turn upholds traditional gender norms.

These conservative invocations of dignity pertaining specifically to women signal that references to dignity as a fundamental value do not necessarily aid projects of overcoming gender inequalities. The problem is that in the context of attending to gender matters the understanding of dignity, especially with regard to women, is already culturally over-determined as especially a matter of their bodies, their (proper) sexuality and their needing protection. If dignity is invoked as a value and norm to protect and further the integrity of bodies and ways of living, then the context of gender inequalities reveals how the substantive interpretations of a person's dignity as gendered remain delimited by the implied assumptions about dignified femininity and masculinity. In turn, being perceived as undignified in one's behaviour exposes one differentially more to violence and inequalities or to the indifference of others in the face of violence or discrimination that one might suffer.

In a global perspective, the gesture of protecting women's dignity also runs a broader risk of inadvertently reiterating the stereotyped colonialist narrative of the 'poor, brown woman' who must be rescued by the 'strong, white man'.6 Frequently, gender discrimination against non-white, lower-class and disabled women tends to be more readily viewed in terms of physical violations of their human dignity, while discrimination against white, able-bodied, middle- and upper-class women in the northern hemisphere tends to be viewed as an issue of infringements of their equal rights. Countering the often well-intentioned but inadvertent repetition of structural discrimination requires considering as crucial elements the intersectionality of gender and race, class, ability, age and other markers in order to diagnose structural gender inequalities and build coalitions across these differentials to abolish these inequalities.7

- 6 On the problem of this stereotypical colonialist narrative, see Spivak 1988.
<sup>5</sup> See, for instance, the section on 'Media and Women' in the 2010 Ugandan government's report on progress in women's empowerment in light of the fifteenth anniversary of the Beijing conference.

<sup>7</sup> On the introduction of intersectionality into feminist criticism, see Crenshaw 1991; Alcoff and Mendieta 2003.

#### Reducing gender inequalities to a women's issue

Not only does women's human dignity as a trope call for careful conceptual and discursive analyses, the undergirding understanding of 'gender' equally requires critical scrutiny insofar as it tends to lend itself to equivocating between 'gender inequalities' and 'discrimination against women'. On UN websites and in its current publications, gender has been defined as socially constructed and as requiring broader analysis with respect to its intersections with other categories, among which disability and sexuality tend often not to make the more standard list of class, race and age. However, the UN definition still presents the socially and historically diverse system of gender norms and roles as mapping onto biologically discreet identities of two sexes, namely, women and men:8 'Gender' 'refers to the social attributes and opportunities associated with being male and female and the relationships between women and men and girls and boys, as well as the relations between women and those between men' (UN Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, undated). Within this framework, gender-sensitive considerations to overcome inequalities tend to focus almost entirely on discrimination against women and girls. This conceptual narrowing obfuscates how substantive gender equality also requires transforming the roles of men and expectations of masculinity. In addition, this – often implicit – understanding of 'gender issues' as primarily 'women's issues' also renders invisible other inequalities on the basis of gender identity (discrimination of transgender, transsexual and intersex individuals) and on the basis of sexual orientation (discrimination based on one's own sex/gender in relation to one's partners' sex/gender).

At the UN, gender identity and sexual orientation have most recently emerged as the next frontier in discussions of gender equality (cf. Organization of American States 2009). Similar to the early stages in the women's human rights movement, these efforts have so far focused on decriminalizing and protecting sexual minorities and transgender, intersex and genderqueer individuals from physical and psychological violence.9 However, bringing genderqueer lives into greater focus also opens up a context for a critical affirmation of gendered human dignity. Laying claim to the human dignity of sexual and gender minorities can be potentially powerful and less ambiguous than it is in the context of women's dignity alone, because genderqueer behaviour is so often stereotyped as 'undignified'. By extending genderqueer rights beyond establishing private

<sup>8</sup> This definition constitutes an advance in light of the difficulties that arose from the use of 'gender' in the context of the Beijing conference, where the Vatican suspected 'gender' to be code for homosexuality.

<sup>9</sup> In the gender equality debates at the UN, sexual orientation and genderqueer identities have been largely avoided, because gender variation and non-heterosexual sexuality have often been denounced as 'Western' and 'Neo-colonial' impositions by a number of African and Islamic governments.

individual freedoms and ensuring tolerance, the claim for the recognition of the human dignity of genderqueer people seeks to make possible a dignified life supported by self-respect and respect by others, especially where this respect is not predicated on conforming to heterosexual and heteronormative norms.

Just as gender injustices and inequalities are not reducible to experiences of violence against women, an enhanced understanding of lived dignity for all humans opens the way to establishing material equality for all by ensuring access to resources and decision-making for those who are differentially more exposed than others to discrimination and violence based on the expressions of their gender and sexuality. Against invoking dignity too uncritically, an encompassing critical gender perspective alerts us to how long histories of power complicate well-intentioned normative invocations of dignity as value and ideal.

#### **References**

- Alcoff, L., and Mendieta, E. (eds.). 2003. *Identities: Race, Class, Gender, and Nationality*. Malden, MA: Blackwell
- Baer, S. 2009. 'Dignity, Liberty, Equality: A Fundamental Rights Triangle of Constitutionalism', *University of Toronto Law Journal* 59(4): 417–68
- Cornell, D. 2002. *Between Women and Generations: Legacies of Dignity*. New York: Palgrave
- Crenshaw, K. 1991. 'Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence Against Women of Color', *Stanford Law Review* 43(6): 1241–99
- Krook, M. L., and Childs, S. (eds.). 2010. *Women, Gender, and Politics: A Reader*. Oxford University Press
- Lorber, J. (ed.). 2010.*Gender Inequality: Feminist Theories and Politics*. Oxford University Press
- Organization of American States. 2009. 'Statement on Human Rights, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity', 4 June 2009. www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/49997ae312.html
- Quataert, J. H. 2009. *Advocating Dignity: Human Rights Mobilizations in Global Politics*. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press
- Reilly, N. 2009. *Women's Human Rights: Seeking Gender Justice in a Globalizing Age*. Cambridge: Polity
- Spivak, G. C. 1988. 'Can the Subaltern Speak?', in L. Grossberg and C. Nelson (eds.), *Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture*. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 271–303
- UN Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. Undated. 'Concepts and Definitions', www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/ conceptsandefinitions.htm