

---

### On the border of life and death: human dignity and bioethics

MARCUS DÜWELL

A greater number of explicit references to human dignity can be found in bioethical debates than in virtually any other context. This may have its ground in the subject-matter of bioethical debates, namely, questions of life and death, which undoubtedly concern the dignity of a person. It may, however, also be a consequence of the strong influence that various religions and ideologies have on these debates. It seems that, in bioethics, the term 'human dignity' is quite often used in a way that seems to distinguish different ideological camps, which gave rise to the idea that the term would be connected to a conservativecommunitarian network with strong links in various religious circles.

The underlying problem in discussing the role of human dignity in bioethics is that most approaches in bioethics are not appropriate for developing an adequate understanding of human dignity as a foundational concept from which the human rights are derived.1 I briefly discuss two examples: Jonsen and Toulmin (1988) claimed that bioethical debates should centre on *cases*, rather than principles (Duwell ¨ 2012: 51–8). They argued that the appropriate way to deal with bioethical cases would be to compare between those cases where we agree in our moral judgments and those cases of medical practice where we are uncertain about what we ought to do. By a critical discussion and comparison of cases it would be much more likely that we would come to an agreement than if we focus on abstract principles and their contested philosophical background theories. Such case-oriented, sometimes even anti-theoretical approaches are quite dominant in bioethics. If human dignity is to be interpreted as a principle from which human rights can be derived,2 it would be difficult to relate this principle to a case-oriented approach in the first place.

But even those approaches in bioethics that explicitly deal with principles have conceptual problems in relating to human dignity. The dominant approach is the so-called 'principlism' of Beauchamp and Childress (2008). This approach assumes that there are four principles (autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence and justice) that would be the normative reference-point in

<sup>1</sup> For a critical discussion, see Duw¨ ell 2012: 64–108.

<sup>2</sup> Concerning the possible interpretation of human dignity in general, see the philosophical introduction in Chapter 2 of this volume.

all bioethical debates. The task of ethical discourses is to specify these four principles with regard to concrete bioethical questions, and to determine their relative weight in a concrete judgment. The approach was often criticized; it was argued that it is unclear which criteria ought to guide the weighing-process, and also that these four principles are simply an articulation of common intuitions lacking any further justification of their validity (Duwell ¨ 2012: 96–102). The more important point in this context is, however, that with principlism there is only place for a specific kind of a 'principle'. Human dignity as foundational principle from which the human rights are derived, is obviously another kind of principle than the four that according to Beauchamp and Childress have to be balanced against each other.

These two examples show that the question of how the dominant bioethical approaches relate to the human rights framework and the possible philosophical conceptualizations of this framework in general will need to be discussed. This discussion is all the more necessary as the important international regulatory documents in biolaw are part of the human rights framework.

References to human dignity have developed since the end of the Second World War. Andorno and Duwell ( ¨ 2013) have argued that three phases of the relevant debates in bioethics may be distinguished.

- (1) Directly after the Second World War (and as a direct response to the crimes of physicians in Nazi concentration camps), the focus lay especially on the protection of human beings in human experiments. The Nuremberg Code is the most prominent articulation of this concern.
- (2) Between the 1970s and 1990s we see an expansion of areas that are regulated with explicit reference to human dignity (for example, abortion, genetic diagnosis, euthanasia), where these references mainly concern the dignity of the *individual* person.
- (3) Since the end of the 1990s we increasingly find references to the dignity of the *human species*, for example in an appeal to enhance the characteristics of the human species or in a concern regarding interventions in the human genome that may alter central features of the human being in a way that violates its dignity.

This chapter aims to systematically and critically reconstruct the role of 'human dignity' in bioethical debates under the headings: (1) Who has dignity? (2) What are the normative consequences of having dignity? (3) The dignity of the human species.

#### **Who has dignity?**

In bioethics, there have been many debates concerning the question who is the *object of moral concern*: who is to be ascribed so-called 'moral status' (cf. Duwell ¨ 2012: 109–24) and thus should morally be taken into account. Different ethical theories would connect different normative implications with the ascription of moral status, and only in some approaches would moral status refer to the much more specific status of a 'bearer of dignity' that is entitled to the entire set of (human) rights. In bioethics, the terminology is not always clear. When, for example, the concept of 'dignity of the creature' was introduced in a debate concerning the constitution of Switzerland, it was clearly not the intention to ascribe the same dignity to animals and plants that we ascribe to human beings. This claim was generally interpreted in the sense that animals should be an object of moral concern, although the precise nature of this moral status remains somewhat vague.3

Bioethics is particularly concerned with questions regarding the *beginning and the end of human life*. Cases of 'brain death' have been heavily disputed since as early as the end of the 1950s. With the introduction of the heart-lung machine it became possible to continue the basic bodily functions of patients whose brain functions had been irreversibly destroyed. At the same time, the use of organs for transplantation purposes became a realistic option. This raised the question: what is the moral status of brain-dead patients? Sometimes this question was phrased in terms of a problem concerning the end of human life, or as the question whether or not a brain-dead patient is still a human being. Such a conceptualization would interpret the moral question as a question of philosophical anthropology: it asks what the human being is from the perspective of the debate concerning persons with reduced brain functions. One can, however, also ask: is the brain-dead patient a person with dignity, and how ought we to deal with him? Since human dignity is seen as the basis of human rights,4 this would raise the conceptual question whether human beings in all phases of their life are rights-bearers in the strict sense, and when the status of a 'being with dignity' begins and ends. And this, in turn, gives rise to the following question: on the basis of what features do we ascribe human dignity? Is it simply membership of the human species, or do we ascribe dignity on the basis of characteristics such as rational capacities? In the latter case: what if those capacities are irreversibly destroyed (as in cases of brain death), would we still have reason to assume that the being in question holds dignity? Similar questions were raised with regard to coma patients. The difference is, however, that there exists a large variation between cases that are diagnosed as coma, and also the diagnosis involves much more uncertainty than in cases of brain death. The uncertainty of the diagnosis gives rise to important precautionary reasons to treat those patients as beings with dignity.

A similar debate took place at the 'other end' of human life, particularly with regard to the status of human embryos and foetuses. Here, it was questioned to what extent we have to ascribe human dignity to an embryo in the first

<sup>3</sup> See Chapter 60 by Heeger and Chapter 61 by Schaber in this volume.

<sup>4</sup> Concerning the general conceptual question about the relationship between human dignity and human rights see the philosophical introduction in Chapter 2 of this volume.

stages of its development. Some scholars argue that we have to ascribe human dignity to human beings from conception onwards on the basis of a concept of personhood that does *not* involve rational capacities. At the other end of the spectrum we find the position that ascribes human dignity depending on the existence of *developed* rational capacities. The latter position, however, is not sincerely advocated. Nearly everybody would see newborn human babies as possessing dignity, and ascribe the right to life to them. Some have asked whether we have obligations to prolong the life of a baby with such a severe handicap that it would lead an extremely painful life.5 Here, the main question is not whether such a baby has human dignity, but what kind of moral obligations would follow from having dignity: does it imply a prohibition of killing *in all cases*?

Authors who link human dignity to the capacity of rationality offer various arguments why we should ascribe dignity to human beings in a stage of development in which no rational capacities are detected. A first set of arguments refers to precaution: since we do not know precisely in which stage rational capacities are developed, we should play it safe and ascribe the dignity status before we phenomenologically or empirically perceive such a development. With regard to embryos and foetuses this argument is, however, of limited importance, since we can be quite certain that embryos and newborns have *not* developed rational capacities. This can, however, at least explain why we ascribe rights to babies before they actually show signs of reflective capacities.

A second set of arguments involves a plea for the extension of the scope of moral protection before the actual development of personal or rational capacities. The *potential* to develop rational capacities is argued to be sufficient for moral status. There are various versions of these arguments. Some would, for instance, say that the continuity of the development between the embryo and the rational person does not allow for sharp distinctions. Others would argue that the potentiality argument does not apply to the fertilized egg, but only to the embryo after the early phases of differentiation, because only after the end of those differentiations is there an ontological identity between the embryo and the future person (Steigleder 1998). It is important to note that such an ontological concept of potentiality significantly differs from a much more unspecific concept where it would be unclear why it could not be applied to sperm cells or unfertilized eggs as well.

A *third* set of arguments does not refer to the moral status of the embryo and newborn but to a possibility that certain uses of such beings could undermine respect for human dignity as such. If we would offer the possibility to exclude

<sup>5</sup> Many scholars, such as Peter Singer and Helga Kuhse (Kuhse and Singer 1985), argue in this context for positions that are probably incompatible with human dignity. This incompatibility is, however, not based on the particular case of disabled babies; it is rather that the ethical tradition they adhere to has no conceptual room for human dignity and inalienable rights in the first place.

human beings from the strict protection of human dignity, this could engender abuse or form a slippery slope because it makes disputable who is a human being and who is not – parallels to Nazi practices when Jews were denied the status of a human being are omnipresent in this debate. This argument does, however, not suffice to explain why we should opt for an ascription of the dignity status from conception onwards; it would for example be possible to see birth as the beginning of the dignity status to avoid such abuse.

Different scholars will ascribe a different role to these kinds of arguments: some will propose to use them (particularly the potentiality argument) to extend the full status of a being of human dignity to all early stages of the development of a human being, while others would opt for a gradualistic concept. The latter would require either that we regard the ascription of human dignity not as an all-or-nothing decision, but that we allow for different grades of dignity (which seems to threaten the idea that all human beings are equal in human dignity), or that potential human persons do not have human dignity, but rather a lower moral status. This latter position would necessitate an explanation of under which conditions such a lower status could overrule the rights and liberties of agents.

In any case, it is not at all evident at what point in the development of a being we have to see him or her as a being with dignity. The need for justification lies not only with the side of those who defend arguments from potentiality or precaution but with all positions.

But a more fundamental problem underlies these considerations: the basis on which we ascribe human dignity to beings must necessarily be connected to particular capacities of human beings, otherwise it would not be intelligible why we ascribe this status in the first place. But it is not obvious that those capacities are necessarily correlated to biological features that we can empirically test or phenomenologically experience. Besides this there is a great number of practical problems: it may for example be impossible to protect the dignity of each individual if we expect specific institutions to judge whether or not rational capacities are present. This too may be a reason to support a broader scope of protection of human dignity.

#### **The normative consequences of having dignity**6

Since the Nuremberg Code, the central point of reference in bioethical debates has been the idea that human beings – as a consequence of having dignity – have to give informed consent if they are involved in human experiments. In the decades since Nuremberg, the justification, scope, role and rules of application for this requirement were matters of bioethical debate (cf. Manson and O'Neill 2007; Beyleveld and Brownsword 2007). Informed consent was regarded as

<sup>6</sup> For an extensive analysis of the questions in this context, cf. Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001, especially 145–266.

mandatory not only in the case of experiments on human beings, but for medical treatment in general. With this extension, the question whether informed consent is a realistic and desirable requirement became more pressing. This requirement sets standards for physicians' communication skills and patients' involvement and comprehension that are impossible to be met. It also seems to engender bureaucracy. In addition, the focus on informed consent led to the question to what extent physicians have to fulfil wishes of patients that go beyond the traditional task of medicine (for example, plastic surgery, extension of life span). Does the requirement of informed consent demand that physicians fulfil all the preferences of their patients, or does informed consent merely protect the patient against unwanted treatment? If we see informed consent as grounded in respect for human dignity, the justification would entail that the person has to give authorization if something is to be done to him or her. This requirement for authorization, however, does not justify all claims regarding fulfilment of preferences since the human rights regime is not about fulfilment of preferences but about rights; the question is therefore what we have a right to.

With specific interpretations of human dignity it is not clear to what extent the normative consequences only result in the protection of individuals against direct violations of their *negative liberty* (their right not to be harmed), or whether respect for human dignity also requires duties that correlate with *positive rights* of patients (rights to be supported). This is particularly relevant in healthcare ethics, since the accessibility of medical treatment determines to a great extent the scope of opportunities and choices agents have. Would respect for the dignity of persons imply the obligation of states to provide effective access to a healthcare system? Questions arise here as to how to determine the threshold of medical treatment that should be financially supported, how much solidarity can be expected from society and the state, and so on.

While most seem to agree that patients' authorization is required for making actions of physicians morally acceptable, it is contested whether there are limits to what the patient may ask, limits that are related to our understanding of human dignity. In the debate about *euthanasia* and *assisted suicide* it was discussed whether physicians could be required to end the life of patients or support their attempts to commit suicide. Some arguments would refer to the intrinsic therapeutic aim of medicine and the question whether euthanasia would be compatible with this. There are, however, other arguments, which are much more focused on human dignity. Some see human dignity as demanding a fundamental restriction of the acts of other human beings, perhaps even forming a kind of taboo (in the line of Durkheim 1897). Often in the debate, respect for human dignity is linked to the doctrine of 'sanctity of life' that considers killing people as crossing the Rubicon. The idea of sanctity of life has, however, quite different roots than the human rights concept (for a critical discussion, cf. Bayertz 1996; Duwell ¨ 2012: 128–34). Others would claim that human beings have a right to 'die with dignity' and that this would not only make it *permissible* to help them if they are in extremely desperate and/or painful situations, but would even *oblige* us to provide help. This latter concept would, however, presuppose that people would lose their dignity if they die in an 'undignified' manner. This way of referring to 'dignity' is conceptually different from human dignity understood as the foundation of human rights. In the latter sense, one would not lose one's dignity by dying in a miserable and perhaps humiliating way. The argument would run rather the other way around: precisely because the patient *has* human dignity, others are categorically obliged to respect the dying person and should help him or her. If we understand human dignity as respect for the authority human beings should have over themselves, this would imply that euthanasia or assisted suicide can only be justified if it is compatible with or even called for by this respect. Such a justification would, however, give clear limitations concerning the legitimate appeal to human dignity. It would strictly exclude that anyone other than the disabled and ill person judges the value of his or her life, and whether this life is dignified.

#### **The dignity of the human species**

A variety of debates do not solely concern the dignity of individual persons, but also touch upon more collective7 dimensions in the use of modern biotechnology. Some of these debates are discussed under the heading 'post-human' or 'transhuman' dignity,8 which would entail an obligation of humans to develop technology further, so that the biological limitations of the species may be transcended. So far no elaborate argument has been given for the claim that such an obligation follows from the concept of human dignity. The scope of relevant debates, though, by far extends the specific discussion about posthumanism.

In the Kantian tradition (but not only there) human dignity would imply that human beings have worth beyond all price. Thus, the individual human being cannot be substituted, and is excluded from exchange of goods. But to what extent does this worth exclude ownership of parts of the human body, or patents on inventions of genetic material that may be developed into a human being (see Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001: 171–218)? These questions are part of debates about intellectual property and patent law. One could consider questions such as whether the dignity of the human person is in principle incompatible with ownership and commodification of those inventions or material.9 For commodification or ownership, the consent or authorization of the agents involved would be required, and it is questionable whether such authorization is at all possible regarding these kinds of technologies. It is furthermore disputed whether the probable or possible consequences of the application of those technologies are such that it is likely that the societal order is changed in a way that

- 9 See Chapter 59 by Campbell in this volume.
<sup>7</sup> See Chapter 35 by Werner in this volume.

<sup>8</sup> Bostrom 2005; see also Sandel 2007 and Chapter 33 by Weiss in this volume.

would affect human dignity. Habermas (2003), for example, voices the concern that cloning, gene therapy and pre-natal genetic diagnosis may result in a dependency between generations. If the parent generation were allowed to determine central genetic characteristics of their offspring, this would affect the changes of the younger generation to develop themselves as independent and free persons. This would arguably risk infringing upon human dignity because a legal and political order based on human dignity would demand a relation of equality between generations – which is precisely what is thought to be undermined by the use of certain technologies. One may have doubts regarding the validity of Habermas' specific position, but the general line of his argumentation is certainly relevant: whether the new technologies are compatible with human dignity depends on the question whether or not those technologies may have consequences that fundamentally undermine equality within the social order or undermine the possibility of a human being to understand him- or herself as free and autonomous being.

Human dignity is not only a concept aimed to protect human beings against atrocities like those in the Nazi concentration camps, but is a concept that should provide normative orientation with regard to a broad spectrum of possible technological developments. How that can be operationalized requires much more discussion, that would need in particular to reflect critically on the methods, theories and principles that are used in bioethics, and whether these are appropriate in understanding the human rights framework in general.

#### **References**

- Andorno, R., and Duwell, M. ¨ 2013. 'Menschenwurdebegriff in der Bioethik', in J. C. ¨ Joerden, E. Hilgendorf and F. Thiele (eds.). *Menschenw¨urde und Medizin: Ein interdisziplin¨ares Handbuch*. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 465–81
- Bayertz, K. (ed.). 1996. *Sanctity of Life and Human Dignity*. Dordrecht: Springer
- Beauchamp, T. L., and Childress, J. F. 2008. *Principles of Biomedical Ethics*. Oxford University Press
- Beyleveld, D., and Brownsword, R. 2001. *Human Dignity in Bioethics and Biolaw*. Oxford University Press

2007. *Consent in the Law*. Oxford: Hart Publishing

Bostrom, N. 2005. 'In Defense of Posthuman Dignity', *Bioethics* 19(3): 202–14

Durkheim, E. 1897. *Le suicide: Etude de sociologie*. Paris: Alcan (trans. J. A. Spaulding and G. Simpson, Suicide: A Study in Sociology. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1951)

- Duwell, M. ¨ 2012. *Bioethics Methods, Theories, Domains*. London, New York: Routledge Habermas, J. 2003. *The Future of Human Nature*, trans.W. Beister. Rehg: Polity Press
- Jonsen, A., and Toulmin, S. 1988. *The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning*. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press
- Kuhse, H., and Singer, P. 1985. *Should the Baby Live? The Problem of Handicapped Infants*. Oxford University Press
- Manson, N. C., and O'Neill. O. 2007. *Rethinking Informed Consent in Bioethics*. Cambridge University Press
- Sandel, M. 2007. *The Case Against Perfection: Ethics in the Age of Genetic Engineering*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Steigleder, K. 1998. 'The Moral Status of Potential Persons', in E. Hildt and D. Mieth (eds.). *In Vitro Fertilization in the 1990s: Towards a Medical, Social and Ethical Evaluation*. Aldershot: Ashgate