

---

### Human dignity and future generations MARCUS DÜWELL ∗

The questions of whether we have obligations towards future generations, why we have such obligations and what these obligations entail, are important topics of discussion in contemporary moral and political philosophy. While there seems to be political consensus on the view that we are obligated to adopt a policy of sustainability, the reasons why we should endorse such an obligation are highly contested. The dominant argument can be found in the so-called 'Brundtland definition' of 'sustainable development': 'sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs' (United Nations 1987:37). In this line of thought, the obligation towards future generations is a normative reason for a sustainable politics. Of course, we also have reasons to act sustainably because of the rights of current (particularly the younger) generations, but various aspects of a sustainable politics are only necessary if we take future generations into account. Such an obligation to a long-term sustainable policy would assume that there is something about future generations that gives us obligations towards them. But if we attribute rights to future generations, we would assume that human rights should be attributed to beings that do not and may never exist. This problem is quite extensively discussed in terms of 'rights of future generations' or 'intergenerational justice' (for example, Grosseries and Meyer 2009; Hiskes 2009) but the concept of human dignity is hardly ever referred to. In the following I will briefly explain (1) the obstacles we are facing if we talk about human dignity in the context of future generations; (2) what such a conceptualization could look like; and (3) what further philosophical and practical issues arise from this.

#### **Why should we talk about human dignity in the context of future generations?**

In providing a normative framework for obligations towards future generations we have basically two options.

<sup>∗</sup> The work reported on in this chapter has benefited from participation in the 'Rights to a Green Future' network, financed by the European Science Foundation. I thank Rutger Claassen and Klaus Steigleder for helpful comments.

We can start with the *obligations that we have towards existing human beings* and assume that we have the same or similar obligations towards future generations. In international law our obligations towards others are conceptualized in terms of human rights and this framework is binding also for the domestic level insofar states obliged themselves to form their legal order in accordance with the provisions of the human rights framework. On the view of this framework, it is assumed that human beings have human rights on the basis of their human dignity. The obligations that follow from this normative status are thought to override other practical considerations.1 If we would attempt to base an obligation regarding future generations on this framework, we would have to show that we have to act in a sustainable way to fulfil our duties towards future generations and that those obligations are a consequence of the duties we have towards the dignity of human beings.

An alternative route would assume that we have a responsibility towards nature for nature's sake, or an obligation towards God not to destroy his property, the cosmos (for example, Taylor 1986; Rolston 1988). The problem with this approach is that it would assume that there are normatively more important considerations than respect for the dignity of the human being, and hence the basic assumption of the human rights regime – that human dignity may not be overruled by other action-guiding considerations – would be rejected. Respect for human dignity would be subordinated to the obligations that we have towards nature, god or the cosmos. Such an eco- or bio-centric position is quite popular because it seems to articulate the broadly shared conviction that it is morally wrong to destroy large parts of the globe for human interests and that the exercise of our liberty should thus be limited. Often the anthropocentrism of modern morality is held responsible for this development. However, the proposed bio- or eco-centric alternatives are by no means uncontroversial, and – more importantly for our purposes here – incompatible with an ethics of human dignity, since they would force us to revise the overriding priority of the human rights framework. It is therefore worthwhile to investigate how a concept of responsibility for future generations on the basis of an ethics of human dignity would look and which philosophical presuppositions are necessary for its justification. The question would thus be whether the human rights framework itself could provide a basis for obligations for a sustainable politics.

#### **Can we apply the concept of human dignity to future generations?**

In talking about future generations, we are confronted with a variety of conceptual and normative problems under which the most famous one would be the so-called *non-existence* and *non-identity-problem*, which questions whether and under which conditions we can harm future generations at all (Parfit 1984;

<sup>1</sup> These conceptual presuppositions are explained in the philosophical introduction in Chapter 2 of this volume.

Roberts and Wassermann 2009). Focused on our context, the problem would be the following: if we think that we are obligated to respect the dignity of other people, we usually presuppose their existence. Future generations, however, are generations of beings that are not yet born. Whether or not they will exist depends on our decisions; we can simply decide not to bring them into existence. If we were to do so, we would perhaps miss important life opportunities for ourselves and it might be particularly sad for those who would be the last people on Earth, but it would not be a rights violation of future generations because they simply do not exist and never will. To say that they have a right to be brought into existence would assume that there are already individuals that have pre-existing rights, which is conceptually impossible. Some people assume that we have an obligation to ensure that humankind continues to exist, but it would be the question whether these obligations could be based on the principle of human dignity. It would be another concept of dignity if we were to speak about the *dignity of the human species as such or a collective dignity*, bypassing the rights and dignity of the individual and assuming that the species would be a kind of collective agent. We should therefore investigate whether we could justify a categorical obligation to continue the life of the human beings on the basis of the same concept of human dignity that forms the basis of the human rights framework. An option would be to ask whether we could decide to end human existence by stopping reproduction in general and still be committed to the conviction that we have to respect the absolute worth of human beings. If the conviction that human beings have unconditional moral worth is morally so fundamental important that it forms the basis of the human rights framework, it could be inconsistent with this assumption to finish the existence of humankind. But even if we assume that we have an obligation to bring human beings into existence because of general obligations to preserve the existence of humanity, it is not plausible to assume that this obligation would be a duty corresponding to the rights of specific future beings to be brought into existence.2

But we can leave this question open here and wonder whether we have other duties towards future generations. The world population is growing more rapidly than ever before. We therefore have strong reasons to assume that there will continue to be human beings in the future, human beings that are not yet born. But does this mean we have moral obligations towards those future generations? Should the rights that are grounded in their purported dignity status be implemented in global and national regulatory orders? This would depend on how we conceptualize human dignity. If we understand human dignity as a normative status that prohibits using those who possess it as objects or 'a mere means', it is not obvious how this relates to future generations: since they do not exist, it seems rather impossible for us to treat them as objects. Even if we destroy the Earth for our purposes, we may be said to ignore

2 I am grateful to Klaus Steigleder for clarifying comments on this point. future generations, but we cannot be said to treat them as a mere means.3 An approach that understands the obligations human dignity gives rise to in terms of the prohibition of humiliating treatment (Margalit 1996) runs into a similar problem: to humiliate someone (as in torture or rape) presupposes a form of contact between human beings, from which we can doubt that this is applicable to our relationship to future generations. However, if we understand human dignity as the basis of the whole human rights regime, then it seems possible that our behaviour today may violate the dignity of future generations.

If human dignity is the basis from which human rights are derived, the whole spectrum of actions that these rights prohibit or prescribe is based on the concept of human dignity. Now, human rights basically exclude those actions that disrespect human beings and protect their rights to exercise freedoms; they prescribe that governments must be accessible for and controlled by citizens and that they must have economic and cultural opportunities. In short, to respect human dignity means to treat human beings in such a way that they are able to live their own life (in this line, cf. Gewirth 1992).

Regarding future generations, however, many of these rights seem to fall outside the scope of our influence. We don't know how they will live and which interests and values they will have: whether or not future generations will live in families; how they will organize their social life; whether they will build opera houses; whether they will have democratic societies; whether they will live in states that are similar to ours and whether they will drink single malt whisky. We don't know those things and it seems unclear whether we influence their life in respects that are important for them. We could therefore conclude that it is not clear to what extent we may violate their rights.

But in another respect our actions today do influence basic conditions of their life. The emissions we produce have influence on the global climate, the level of the oceans, the temperature on the globe etc.; we are using natural resources that will probably be extremely valuable for them, and our reproductive behaviour is responsible for an extreme growth of the world population. In all these respects we have a large influence on the basic conditions of their life. It is evident that all these influences affect aspects of their life that are as important to them as they are to us, since future generations will share some of our basic biological features. Whatever aims they may have, whatever goals they may wish to achieve in life, they will always need some quality of the environment and access to some basic goods in order to realize the goals that they want to achieve. That means that, even if we don't know what future generations will value and how they

3 The prohibition on treating human beings as a 'means only' is prominently formulated in Kant's 'formula of humanity'. But I assume that this prohibition is a consequence of the more broadly formulated obligation in Kant to treat human beings as an 'end in itself'. In this sense, I assume that Kant's concept of human dignity has a much broader scope than the prohibition of instrumentalization of human beings.

will live, we have all reason to assume that we influence the basic conditions of their life. *If human rights form a protection against standard threats to human existence and aim to ensure equal access to those goods that are required for human beings in order to be able to live a life of their own, then it seems inevitable that we have the possibility to violate the rights of future generations*.

Perhaps such an approach to human rights is surprising because discussions on human rights often just focus on individual liberties. In order to protect individual liberties, however, the human rights regime needs to safeguard certain goods that function as the *condition* for effectuating these liberties. If the freedom of speech, access to public offices or freedom of religion is to be protected by the human rights regime, then those goods that are in a basic sense necessary to enjoy those rights have to be protected in the first place. If we have a right to be governed by a democratically elected government, it is impossible to respect this right without giving access to political information and educating people to the extent that they have the skills required for understanding this information. Relevant for the human rights regime are hence not only the interests and goals of *individual* people, but also specific goods, which are important for human agents *in general*.

In this context, Gewirth speaks of 'generic rights' (Gewirth 1978: 64, see also Gewirth 2001), 'rights to the necessary conditions of agency'. These conditions are in part different for various agents, depending on various cultural, historical and individual circumstances of actions. Furthermore, it is possible that human beings evolve in various respects in the future. But we have reasons to assume that humans in the future will share some basic biological aspects with us and that they will have at least some fundamental interests4 equivalent to ours. Wherever and whenever human beings exist, they have the right to water to drink and air to breathe, are in need of social recognition and other physical, psychological and social conditions that form *generic conditions for agency*. To determine these rights in detail is more complex because those generic conditions are not just the conditions for mere survival but those goods that are necessary for a meaningful way of realizing goals of action. In any case, it is obvious that the destruction of basic generic goods would violate the human rights of future generations.

It is in this context important to notice that with regard to the generic rights there is a significant difference to cases that are often discussed in the context of future generations. Parfit (1984) starts his discussion about the so-called 'nonidentity problem' with reference to cases of children with severe disabilities. The example of an abortion of such a child is used as an example that shows it is

4 To talk here about 'goods' and 'needs' in the explication of human rights does not imply any commitment to an 'interest theory of rights' (rights that are based in interests of agents). In a 'will theory of rights' (the rights are based in the will of agents), generic rights must be presupposed because they are necessary for enabling agents to form goals and realize them, independently of the aims they want to achieve. impossible to harm future generations, because such an abortion would avoid the existence of just such a child, and therefore nobody would be harmed. In the case of environmental rights, all future right-holders are affected, independently of their specific features. Of course, it will be difficult in light of the non-identity problem to formulate comparative judgments that will compare whether some generations are better off in comparison to others if different strategies with regard to environmental policies had been taken. But this difficulty does not exclude that in principle we can violate their generic rights.

If we assume that there will be future generations, then we have to assume that they have some generic (particularly environmental) rights that are fundamentally important because the goods that are protected by those rights are fundamental life conditions. Those rights are so fundamental that they directly affect their dignity as human beings, that is, the dignity of beings that should be enabled to live a life of their own. Whether or not we can violate their dignity depends not on the existence of the right-holders but on the influence we have on the goods to which they have a right. With regard to some environmental rights, it is obvious that we violate their rights in respect of these goods.

With a commitment to the dignity of all human beings we are obliged to give normative priority to ensure and create those conditions that are necessary for enabling human beings to live an autonomous life, independently of the time in which they live. Since the consequences of our actions have become more farreaching for the future during the last decades, the scope of our responsibility has become broader – which makes it necessary to rethink the human rights regime in an intergenerational perspective. This would imply reformulating the human rights regime in a very fundamental way. We would not just add another right to the existing human rights lists; we would have to rethink the whole human rights regime in an intergenerational perspective. This would be a fundamental shift for the entire regulatory regime. In the context of such a fundamental shift, it is necessary to ask whether this change is consistent with the normative basis of the human rights, that is, whether it is consistent with the general interpretation of the concept of human dignity. Because of the far-reaching nature of these changes, the case of future generations is a particularly appropriate one in which to reflect on the role of human dignity as the foundation of the human rights regime. If my argument so far is correct, it is not only consistent with the concept of human dignity to take future generations into account, it is even normatively required.

#### **Questions for the dignity of future generations**

In the previous section, it was argued that we are able to violate the dignity and rights of future generations. But there are various questions which need to be answered in order to develop this position in detail. I will briefly mention five questions:

- (1) We would need criteria to determine under which conditions changes of the environment are so far-reaching that the impact on the life of future generations would constitute a serious violation of their rights. This implies that we would have to be able to determine some *thresholds*for unacceptable environmental consequences of our actions.
- (2) In order to respect the dignity of future generations, we would have to be able to *compare the relative importance of their basic rights with the rights of contemporaries*. The question will be how much weight potential rights violations of future generations will hold *vis-`a-vis* the exercise of liberties by current generations. That is all the more important as it is likely that effective protection of the environmental rights of future generations implies that current generations have to reduce their travel, their use of energy, their reproductive behaviour etc. To justify those far-reaching consequences, it would be necessary to set priorities in the comparison of environmental rights of future generations with the rights of current generations.
- (3) We don't know *how many future generations* there will be, nor *how many people there will be in each generation*. With regard to the use and distribution of natural resources and also with regard to climate change, it would nonetheless make a difference whether we have to think about five or five hundred generations. It is, however, impossible to predict this. It would, for example, be difficult to make comparative judgments about how policies today would affect future generations and comparative judgments about the respective rights violations. A concept of intergenerational human dignity would be needed to deal with this problem.
- (4) It is impossible to predict how various actions will influence the environmental conditions of future generations. We are confronted with many *risks* and *uncertainties* with regard to the consequences of our actions. In order to determine our obligations towards future generations, we would have to be able to distinguish between morally acceptable and unacceptable risks and uncertainties. This problem is not really new: with regard to nuclear energy we are accustomed to discussing the question whether the risk of nuclear waste is acceptable with regard to the rights of future generations. However, if we broaden the scope of this problem to all environmental conditions of the life of future generations, this becomes very complex; it is often impossible to make a calculation of the risks. Under such circumstances of uncertainty, scholars refer to the 'precautionary principle'. This entails that we – because of the importance of the goods that are at stake – should refrain from some actions for precautionary reasons, even if we cannot predict a real risk. But even though the precautionary principle plays a significant role in legal regulations and in the scholarly literature, there are as yet no convincing criteria for the application of this principle. We should at the very least be able to explain when the respect for the dignity of future generations makes it obligatory for us to act in a precautionary manner.

- (5) It is not evident whether a sustainable politics that respects the basic rights of future generations can be implemented in the context of the democratic state. Current generations tend to use elections to vote for political parties that support their interests, while future generations have no vote. This question is clearly related to the concept of democracy and the relationship between human dignity and democracy. If our democratic rights are based on human dignity (we have a right to decide about our government because we have human dignity) then there could be a conflict between our democratic rights and the environmental rights of future generations. The question is to what extent the respect for the dignity of future generations may justify restrictions in the exercise of our democratic rights or whether this respect should be a reason to think about a structural representation of future generations within the existing democratic institutions.
#### **References**

Gewirth, A. 1978. *Reason and Morality*. Chicago University Press

- 1992. 'Human Dignity as the Basis of Rights', in M. J. Meyer and W. A. Parent (eds.). *The Constitution of Rights: Human Dignity and American Values*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 10–28
- 2001. 'Human Rights and Future Generations', in M. Boylan (ed.), *Environmental Ethics*. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 207–12
- Grosseries, A., and Meyer, L. (eds.). 2009. *Intergenerational Justice*. Oxford University Press
- Hiskes, R. P. 2009. *The Human Right to a Green Future: Environmental Rights and Intergenerational Justice*. Cambridge University Press
- Margalit, A. 1996. *The Decent Society*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Parfit, D. 1984. *Reasons and Persons*. Oxford University Press
- Roberts, M. A., and Wassermann, D. T. (eds.). 2009. *Harming Future Persons: Ethics, Genetics and the Nonidentity Problem*. Dordrecht: Springer
- Rolston, H. 1988. *Environmental Ethics: Duties to and Values in The Natural World*. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press
- Taylor, P. W. 1986. *Respect for Nature: A Theory of Environmental Ethics*. Princeton University Press
- United Nations. 1987. *Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future*