### <span id="page-117-0"></span>**[How to Treat Someone with Respect](#page-7-0)**

*Oliver Sensen*

Respect is one of our fundamental moral ideas. We believe that it is a *universal* requirement in that *all* human beings should be respected, independently of their race, gender, religion, orientation, or social status. But we also believe that we should *always* respect others: Even a criminal awaiting a just punishment, for instance, should not be subjected to inhumane treatments. We should still respect him as a human being. Respect is not necessarily the whole of morality; there might be additional standards of care, culture, and appreciation, for instance. But we think of respect like a fundamental grid that protects dignity and rights, and it seems to be the necessary background for living together peacefully. In addition, we also care deeply about respect. For instance, the complaint "he was just using me" expresses not just a moral condemnation, but is associated with a host of strong feelings as well. But what, more specifically, does one have to do in order to respect someone? Is there a criterion, or a clear guidance, that can tell us what we have to do (or refrain from doing) in order to respect someone?

My aim in this chapter is to search for a criterion that could serve as such a *universal* moral demand. This would be a mid-level principle that converts the general command to respect someone into a more concrete directive (for example, not to merely use another). I shall argue that many of our strongest intuitions about respect—such as prohibitions on using someone as a causal means, or requirements of gaining their actual consent—only have a local application. They are of crucial importance in specific types of cases, but they are not the universal criterion of respect. In this they function like thick ethical concepts such as gratitude or forgiveness: One might be able to give a rich specification about when one violates these dictates, but they only apply to a limited range of cases (cf. Williams 1985: 129). Further, I shall limit my discussion to respect *for others*. This is not to deny the importance of self-respect (cf. Dillon 2015), but here I shall only explore how one should always treat everyone else, and I shall limit my analysis to competent human adults. In searching for the universal criterion, I shall take inspiration not so much from Kant who influenced many of our initial ideas, but more from contemporary authors such as Stephen Darwall, Robin Dillon, Joel Feinberg, Thomas Hill, Derek Parfit, Tim Scanlon, and Allen Wood who all have greatly enhanced our understanding of respect.

In order to search for the universal criterion of respect, I shall first distinguish different ways we use the term "respect" (section 1). I shall argue that the kind of respect I am after is about giving someone due regard, and I try to specify this notion further (in section 2). I shall then examine the main candidates for how we can specify due regard, as not using someone (sections 3 and 4), and as securing their consent (section 5), before arguing for my own conclusion (in section 6), as well as considering objections against it (section 7). I shall argue that respect consists in not exalting oneself above others, which itself consists in not breaking rules we regard as objectively necessary.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

### **1. Different Kinds of Respect**

What do we ordinarily mean by "respect"? The Oxford English Dictionary lists four main contemporary usages (in contrast to former and obsolete ones) of the word "respect": (1) a form of politeness, (2) a feeling of esteem, or the state of being esteemed, (3) a due regard for something, or (4) a particular aspect of something.1 In this section, I shall argue that of these four meanings only (3) is a candidate for the type of universal *moral* requirement I am looking for in this essay.

Usage (4) is not a prescription about any conduct; it merely refers to a particular aspect, point, or detail. We might use this notion of respect, for instance, in a sentence like: "In this respect, an electric car is cheaper than the gasoline alternative." "Respect" here just emphasizes a particular perspective or detail, and is not the respect I am interested in in this essay.

"Respect" can also, as in usage (1), refer to politeness. In this sense, we might say that Paul treated Betty very respectfully. However, while it might be a moral demand to be polite—we teach it to our children and might demand politeness from others—it is not a criterion of the universal grid of respect. This is because politeness is neither necessary nor sufficient for conforming with the grid. One can conform to the universal standard of respect, while also being impolite or neutral. More importantly, one can be polite, but still violate the morally required respect. Consider the following case:

*Highway Robber*: A mugger holds you up at gunpoint. He greets you politely, holds open the door for you, and wishes you all the best on your way out. But he takes your money. (Cf. Parfit 2011: 215)

By itself, politeness does not track the universal grid of moral respect.

In usage (2), "respect" refers to an (involuntary) feeling of awe or admiration. We might feel this esteem for someone's abilities, qualities, or achievements. However, it is not something that is commanded—for we feel it involuntarily and it does not prescribe a moral behavior on our part:

*Castle Attack*: In a just war you are laying siege to the castle of your opponent. Upon seeing the castle for the first time, you are awed by its defenses, and feel respect for its builder. You would like to hire the builder for your own castle; nonetheless, you are justified in attacking the fortifications.2

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

This form of respect is often called "*reverentia*" or "appraisal respect" (see Feinberg 1973; Hill 1973; Darwall 1977) and is distinguished from "*observantia*" or "recognition respect," i.e., the respect one *should* have for others. Scholars specify *reverentia* slightly differently, but the common thread is that *reverentia* is an involuntary feeling of awe or esteem. A heroic deed, an impressive quality can cause a certain form of reverence. This feeling can occur for morally neutral qualities, and it might not only refer to persons. For instance, a climber might have respect for a challenging mountain. However, some scholars argue that, properly speaking, appraisal respect only refers to a person's character and its actions (cf. Darwall 1977; Kant 1996: 4:401n).3

This leaves usage (3). I shall argue that the respect one owes to others, *observantia*, consists in giving others their due regard. But what is due regard?

### **2. Respect as Due Regard**

Since many of our intuitions about respect are inspired by Kant, we can use an initial reading of his Formula of Humanity as a first approximation of what moral respect requires. The formula runs: "*So act that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means*" (Kant 1996: 4:429). Kant calls the principle the "supreme limiting condition" (Kant 1996: 4:430–431) of our freedom, and regards it as *universally* valid. According to a compelling reading of this formula, one fails to respect another morally if the following four conditions are satisfied: (1) One violates a duty of omission. On this account, there is a difference between duties of respect and duties of love. While respect roughly covers perfect or negative duties, e.g., not to steal, lie, or injure another, duties of love are imperfect and positive, i.e., about helping others (cf. Kant 1996: 6:449–450). Respect, then, seems to correspond to that part of the Kantian formula that prescribes not to treat others as mere means. This itself is said to contain three further conditions (cf. Kleingeld forthcoming): (2) In order to treat someone as a *mere* means, one has to have a certain attitude, and do it intentionally; (3) the other has to be a causal *means* to fulfilling one's intentions, and (4) one does not give adequate weight to the other's actual consent.

While these conditions capture many of our moral intuitions, I shall argue that the requirement to respect someone is actually wider than these four conditions. I believe that this is so for the following reasons:

(1) The first point would restrict the scope of duties of respect to perfect or negative duties: One should not encroach upon life and property of another. In a Kantian setting, therefore, the following case would not be a failure of respect:

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

*Bad Samaritan*: A man walking in a desert, and carrying more water than he needs, encounters a person dying of thirst. Nonetheless, the man does not help the person in need. (Cf. Parfit 2011: 226)

However, there is no need to restrict respect to perfect or negative duties (cf. Wood 1999: 143).4 If you believe that one should respect a flag or a religious artifact, for instance, this might involve positive actions, such as putting your hand on your heart or kneeling, keeping the objects safe, repairing them, etc. Giving something its due regard does not seem to be limited to not harming the object (cf. Wood 1999: 141–142).

(2) The second point concerns the locus of respect. Does respecting someone amount to possessing a certain *attitude*, or does it consist in a particular *action* as an observable behavior? It is a common view, not just in a Kantian setting, that treating someone with respect requires a certain attitude on the part of the agent (cf. Darwall 2006: 140–143; Scanlon 2008: 89–90; Parfit, 2011: 227). While this is an important part of our everyday usage of "respect" (see section 7 below), it seems to be less important for the universal criterion of rightness I am after. Consider Parfit's example of the criminal coffee buyer:

*Ruthless Coffee Buyer*: A criminal enters a coffee shop, and would have no qualms about shooting the clerk in order to get a coffee. He does not regard the clerk as having any importance or rights; nonetheless the criminal finds it easier if he acts friendly, pays for the coffee, and leaves a generous tip. (Cf. Parfit 2011: 216)

The criminal does not have an *attitude* of respect, but he *treats* the clerk correctly, and in a respectful manner. So, there are at least two different objects of evaluation. On the one hand, we can ask whether someone is a morally good person, i.e., has the right attitudes or a good will, and, on the other, whether the person does the right thing, i.e., acts correctly (cf. Kant 1996: 4:390; Scanlon 2008: 100f.; Parfit 2011: 216). Notice that even Kant's formula starts with "*So act*" (Kant 1996: 4:429) and that it is only later that he wants to include the requirement about the right attitude in the content of the Formula of Autonomy (cf. Kant 1996: 4:431–432).

What I am after in this essay is a criterion for morally respectful *action*. However, I am not looking for a list of particular actions that make up respect (such as holding open doors, shaking hands, or looking someone in the eye). I am not sure that there is such a list. It seems that—depending on the context—any action could be respectful or disrespectful. For instance, shaking hands might be respectful in normal circumstances, but disrespectful if one has the flu. Looking someone in the eye might be a sign of respect but looking someone else's partner in the eye might be considered an insult, and so on. What I am looking for instead is a mid-level principle that constitutes respect. Two candidates that immediately come to mind are (3) not to treat someone merely as a means, and (4) to secure another's consent. The lessons from analyzing these accounts will lead to another option.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

### **3. Respect as Not Merely Using Someone**

The first and foremost candidate for how one respects another is to not use them as mere means. In this sense Kant says that the "duty of respect for my neighbor is contained in the maxim not to degrade any other to a mere means to my ends" (Kant 1996: 6:450). This is the negative part of Kant's Formula of Humanity: "*So act that you use humanity . . .never merely as a means*" (Kant 1996: 4:429). In order to make sense of the prohibition not to use others as mere means, it seems that one requirement is that the other must be a *causal* means to my ends (cf. Scanlon 2008: 112; Kleingeld forthcoming). Take the following case:

*Earthquake*: After an earthquake, a building is about to collapse. I can only prevent the collapse if I take you and use your body as a pillar to prop up the building. (Cf. Parfit 2011: 185)

While treating someone this way seems wrong—all things being equal—I argue that it is not a candidate for a *universal* requirement of respect. This is because using someone as a *causal* means is neither (i) necessary, nor (ii) sufficient for a *universal* requirement of respect. Let's consider each case in turn.

- (i) That someone is a *causal* means is not *necessary* for all forms of disrespect, because one can treat others disrespectfully without involving them as a causal means. For instance, if you drive your car recklessly, or shoot a gun wildly, you might inadvertently injure and kill people. These bystanders are not a means to your driving the car or shooting the gun. You could perform your action even better if they were not there. These are two examples in which you are not treating others as a causal means, yet you are violating what we take to be the universal grid of respect.5
- (ii) Treating someone as a causal means is also not *sufficient* for violating the fundamental grid of respect. On a first level, the literature on respect is quick to point out that that using someone, by itself, is not morally wrong.

If movers carry boxes for you, or if you ask someone for information, you are using the other as a causal means. But this in itself is not necessarily disrespectful. What violates respect, it is said, is if you are *merely* using others. When does one merely use another?

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

In our ordinary conception of merely using someone it seems that in addition to using someone, one also has to regard the other as a mere tool (cf. Parfit 2011: 227). However, we have seen above that the question of how an agent *regards* another is an important judgment about the moral quality of a person, but not a question of the rightness of behavior. A better conception seems to be that one uses another merely as a means if one treats the other person in a way that one does not give adequate weight to their actual consent (cf. Kleingeld forthcoming), and does not explain one's actions to them, etc. One treats the other as a thing, as opposed to merely regarding them as such. However, even this conception would not be sufficient for violating the fundamental grid of respect. Take a similar example to Parfit's *Earthquake* case:

*Leaking Boat*: You are on a boat that has serious leaks, and is about to take on too much water. A quick thinker takes you, and—without explanation or asking for your consent—places you in a way that stops the leak before going on to do it to another.

In an ordinary sense, the quick thinker treated you merely as a means. However, everyone would have lost their lives, including you, if the quick thinker would not have acted this way. Although he treated you as a mere means, he did not violate what we and you yourself take to be the right way of behaving in this situation. It does not violate the universal grid of respect.

Against this analysis, one could object that we ordinarily do not believe that one uses another merely as a means if (a) if our behavior is guided by an important moral belief or goal, such as saving a life, or (b) if we are willing to bear a great burden to spare the victim, for example, although we put another in harm's way, we are rushing to try to take his place (cf. Parfit 2011: 227). However, this ordinary conception does not seem like the right analysis for a universal criterion of respect. For if disrespect could be allowed by another moral principle, as (a) holds, then this other principle would be the highest overriding principle, not "do not use merely as a means," and then this other dictate should be this principle which we should be looking for as the principle of respect. In addition, bearing a great burden for someone, (b), for example, sacrificing one's life for one's spouse or children, is still compatible with treating them as mere means in less extreme situations of everyday life, as Parfit points out (cf. Parfit 2011: 215).

So—to take stock at this juncture—our ordinary conception of not using someone as a mere means is not the best expression of a principle of respect that we think is universal, in the sense that it is a fundamental grid in which our interactions should take place. However, there are several ways in which one could try to broaden the application of not using someone, and I shall first consider some of those.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

On a *first* level, one can try to broaden the requirement of not using someone by proposing that one should not treat another *as a mere thing*. With this change one seems to be able to handle examples such as the reckless driving case, and the example in which you shoot your gun wildly. In these examples you are not using another person causally, but one could argue that you are treating the bystanders as if they were mere things. However, although this change seems to be an improvement for understanding what it takes to respect someone morally, in its literal meaning this change might not be enough. Consider the following case:

*Psychological Torturer*: A torturer finds that he can inflict more pain to its victim if he does not treat him as a mere thing, but if he uses psychological torture. So, the torturer finds out what the victim cares for, and presents the victim with a choice to destroy it or cooperate.

If the moral requirement of respect would consist in not treating others as a thing, the torturer could try to defend himself in court by saying that he did not treat the victim as a mere thing, but as a human being.

On a *second* level, one could argue that not only should one not treat another as mere thing, but one should give the other some consideration, and respond positively to their wishes. According to this requirement, the reckless driver is disrespectful because he does not consider the bystander, and the requirement forbids psychological torture because it does not respect the wishes of the victim not to be tortured. However, even this does not seem to be enough. For instance, a slave owner who lets the slaves rest during the hottest part of the day does give the slaves some positive consideration, but he still violates the requirements of universal respect by holding them as slaves (cf. Parfit 2011: 213).

On a *third* level, one could try to strengthen the requirement by saying that one should treat another *as if she is important*. On this account, it is not enough to give others some consideration, but one must treat them as if they have a high importance. Again, this seems to be an improvement over the other candidates and should be able to rule out holding slaves. However, even this might not be enough to establish a universal criterion of respect. One can treat a jewel, or a precious artifact, as being important, but one still would govern their fate. The agent would determine how it is kept, when it is moved, and so forth. In the human case, it would allow someone to treat human beings paternalistically, and this seems to violate the universal grid of respect. Something else seems to be needed to respect a fellow human being.

The solution, I believe, is that one should treat the other not merely as if she is important, but that one should also give the other an input, a voice, in how she is treated. The second part of the respect requirement, giving the victim a voice, points to the importance of consent. But there are different forms of consent, and we still must determine the right level (see section 5 below). Before doing that, however, I shall first argue that the importance of consent is also confirmed if one looks at the common complaint "he was just using me."

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

### **4. Respect and Just Using Someone**

The complaint "he was just using me" not only picks out a moral wrong, but it is also associated with a strong emotional reaction. However, what exactly is one objecting to in raising the complaint? Consider the following case:

*Festival*: Paul asks Betty to accompany her to a festival, and—although it is not explicit—the suggestion is that this is a date. However, later she finds out that he was just using her to get access to her social circle at the festival, and be introduced to one of her friends in whom he has a romantic interest.

(Cf. Scanlon 2008: 115–117)

It seems that in cases like these the complaint is not—despite the first appearance—that one was a causal means to someone else's plans. Imagine a different scenario. You want to go to a festival, but everyone needs to bring a friend in order to gain entry. You might find a friend in a similar situation, and you both agree to be each other's ticket. In this case you are both a causal means to the other, and we do not find it objectionable. What we find objectionable in the first case is not that we were a causal means as such, but that Paul *lied* about his intention, and withheld information to which Betty was entitled (cf. Scanlon 2008: 115). Betty was not given the truth, and she could not consent to the way she was treated. The complaint to be treated *merely* as a means, then, seems to refer to a requirement of consent.

Of course, there is more to the charge "she was just using me." There is also a strong emotional reaction. We often feel incredibly disappointed when we find out about the other's true intentions. However, the emotional reaction is not necessarily directed at a moral fault in the other person. Maybe there was no explicit expression that the outing was meant to be a date. So, in the first instance, the disappointment might track that one's own romantic hopes were dashed. Such frustration might be common when we realize that a supposed friend only calls when he needs something. But one could object that the disappointment we feel is not necessarily about frustrated wishes. There could be situations in which one reacts to an immorality:

*Business Partner*: A successful businessman asks you to invest in one of his enterprises. He promises great returns. You are not friends with this person, and you know him to be motivated solely by profits. You later find out that he provided you with falsified data. (Cf. Scanlon 2008: 90–91)

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

Again, you might complain that "he was just using me." But in this case the emotional reaction is not necessarily a disappointment in the other person—you knew that the businessman was just motivated by greed. You react to an injustice, that you were lied to and robbed of your money. What these examples show, I believe, is that the complaint "he was just using me" is not so much an objection to being a causal means, but about not having agreed to the way one has been treated. The complaint "he was just using me" also points to a requirement of gaining the other's consent. But which form of consent is important for a universal criterion of respect, in contrast to being only of local character?

### **5. Respect as Consent**

There are different kinds of consent, for instance: (1) actual, (2) hypothetical, and (3) possible consent. I shall discuss each of them in turn.

(1) The standard form of consent is *actual* assent. As a moral requirement it demands that one secures the other's actual agreement regarding actions that immediately affect her. If, for instance, I drive your car, or enter your apartment, the moral permissibility of it seems to depend on whether I have your actual consent. However, although actual consent seems to be of prime importance in many cases involving property, including the ownership of one's own body,6 it seems that actual consent is neither (i) necessary, nor (ii) sufficient for complying with the universal grid of respect.

(i) Actual consent does not always seem to be *necessary* for morally respectful behavior. If, after an accident, you are unconscious, and cannot give your actual consent to a life-saving surgery, the medical personnel is still allowed to perform the necessary procedures—all things being equal. One could object that doctors should follow advance directives, such as a living will, and that they are not allowed to perform the surgery if there is a prior expression of the patient that no life-saving treatment should be performed. It therefore seems that actual consent is still the most important consideration in this case.

However, there are other cases in which actual consent does not seem to be necessary. If, for instance, in a rising tide you are steering a boat and you have time to save either five who are stranded on one island, or one person who is stranded on another, you do not have to drive by the one person to get her consent to rescue the five instead. And there might be exceptions in cases of property as well. For instance, if your house is on fire, and the only water source is on my property, you seem to be justified in coming onto my property, and taking the water even if you do not have my consent (cf. Scanlon 2008: 63–64). Or if your partner's or child's life is in danger, and the only way to get them to a hospital in time is to take my car, you seem to be justified—all things being equal—in taking my car even if I cannot give my consent.7 Actual consent does not seem to be morally necessary in all cases that pertain to the universal grid of respect.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

(ii) Actual consent also does not seem to be *sufficient* for respectful behavior in all cases:

*Cannibal*: A man searches online for a volunteer who consents to being eaten. He gets responses to his advertisements and eats and kills the victim apparently with his consent.8

In cases like these, it is questionable whether the actual consent of the victim renders an otherwise reprehensible action morally right. Less extreme cases are selling yourself into slavery, or selling your organs. Does the actual consent of a victim make any action in agreement with the universal grid of respect? A society might limit the actual consent of an agent in the name of respect for the universal dignity of human beings. A famous example of this is the 1995 decision of the French Counsel d'État to uphold a ban on dwarf-tossing.9 Even if the dwarfs consented to being shot out of a cannon into a net, the action was still deemed by the court as demeaning human beings, and therefore to be against the universal grid of respect.

A different problem with actual consent is that people might agree to something even though the option is a case of exploitation, coercion, or they do not fully understand what is proposed. For instance, a freed slave might agree to wages that are less than fair and therefore fail to respect her equal status (cf. Williams 1973b: 236–237). A person might put a gun to your head and give you the option between your money or your life. A medical patient, or a computer customer, might sign a lengthy consent form without fully understanding what she assents to (cf. O'Neill, 2002: 40–44). This suggests that actual consent is not a sufficient criterion for equal, respectful behavior in all cases.

(2) One can remedy several of these problems if one switches from actual to *hypothetical* consent as the universal criterion of respect. The question then becomes what an agent *would* consent to under hypothetical conditions, for example, if she were awake, fully rational, fully informed, and not coerced, etc. Under these conditions, the accident victim would most often consent to the life-saving surgery, the computer customer might not sign away her privacy, and the robbery victim would not hand over the money. Hypothetical consent seems to be a more reliable guide when identifying morally respectful actions.

However, there are at least two problems with this form of hypothetical consent. One problem is how one can identify the right ideal conditions (of rationality, impartiality, etc.). Consider the following dilemma: Either the ideal conditions are themselves moral in nature, or they are not (cf. Shafer-Landau 2003: 42–43). If they are moral in nature, e.g., if impartiality is already a requirement of moral respect, then it is not consent as such that is the moral criterion, but the moral conditions (such as impartiality). But if the conditions are not moral in nature, it is not clear why the result of the hypothetical consent procedure should yield a *moral* result. For instance, if it is merely prudent to be fully informed and uncoerced, then one would expect only a prudent result from hypothetical consent. It needs a further premise to generate a *moral* command.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

In addition, there is at least one other problem with identifying the right hypothetical conditions. The second problem is a problem of degree. It seems that the more perfect the conditions are, e.g., if we stipulate that the decider has full information of all the relevant facts, perfect, god-like rationality and impartiality, and so on, the more there will be a gap between what people actually consent to and what they would consent to under these hypothetical conditions. For instance, one could argue that under perfect conditions, a person could rationally consent to being pushed off a bridge in order to stop a train that would otherwise kill five people (cf. Parfit 2011: 220). This is paradoxical: One could overrule someone's (actual) consent in the name of consent.

A defender of hypothetical consent could reply that—while it might be rational for the person to agree to being pushed—he cannot agree to being pushed against his will. This reply would also work against a rapist who tries to justify his heinous crime by saying that the victim could have rationally consented to sleeping with him. Again, one can respond that the victim could not consent to being forced against her will (cf. Parfit 2011: 191–192). While this response seems absolutely right, it would shift the focus from hypothetical consent back to actual consent. The rapist would only have to ask the victim first whether he can sleep with her. It then depends on the actual consent of the victim whether the act is a case of coercion or not. These examples make the case that actual consent is often more important than hypothetical consent. But then hypothetical consent is not the universal guiding principle we are after.

The lesson we should draw from this is, I believe, that actual consent is of prime importance in matters of property, for instance, and especially the ownership and integrity of one's own body (cf. Parfit 2011: 200). However, as I have argued above, this is not a universal criterion that applies to all cases. It has prime importance in a specified area, and so might hypothetical consent have importance in other areas, but neither principle is the criterion of respect we are searching for in this essay.

(3) However, there is at least one other form of consent, and since I have earlier argued that it does need an input from the victim in order to respect her, maybe this form of consent will be able to establish the universal criterion of moral respect. The third form is *possible* consent. If actual consent asks what one does consent to, hypothetical consent asks what one would consent to, and possible consent asks what one *could* consent to. In this sense, Kant says against false promising that "he whom I want to use for my purposes by such a promise cannot possibly agree to my way of behaving toward him" (Kant 1996: 4:429–430).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

However, there are still different kinds of possible consent, and which one is the right form for universal moral respect? One way is physical impossibility. For instance, if you are prevented from speaking or nodding your head, you cannot physically consent to a proposal. Another form is logical impossibility. If someone lies to you, you cannot consent to the way you will be treated because you are not told what the proposition is. One can argue that these two requirements of possible consent would rule out coercion and deception as violating the universal grid of respect (cf. O'Neill 1989: 110–111, 138; Korsgaard 1996: 138–140).

However, it seems that these constraints too do not seem to be either necessary or sufficient for a universal grid of respect. Again the example of being unconscious after an accident might serve as an illustration. If you are unconscious, you cannot consent to receiving a life-saving surgery, but it still would be right, all things being equal (cf. Parfit 2011: 190). Conversely, an action might be wrong even if it stays within these constraints of this type of possible consent. If someone says to you: "Start running, for I will try to kill you," he is neither deceiving you nor physically hindering your consent, but he would still violate what we take to be the standards of universal respect.

There are several other forms of possible consent, and I shall argue that they fit our intuitions more closely. For instance, Kant seems to advocate a kind where one *morally* cannot consent to something. His example is that one "could not agree" to a tax that is leveled on some, but exempts others who are in the same situation, "since one cannot take this unequal distribution of burdens to be just."10 What makes it impossible to consent to the uneven tax is that it is unjust. So, one cannot consent to it in light of a moral principle of equality, justice, and fairness (cf. Rawls, 2000: 190–192). On this view, consent is not by itself a right-making feature. It presupposes an independent moral principle of equality and fairness. But if it is guided by the moral principle it can track what is morally right. As such, it does not express the requirement to give another a voice, but rather the first aspect of treating others as of equal high importance. If I treat others unfairly, for example, by trying to be a free rider, I am treating others as if they are of lesser importance. Rules are valid for them, not for me.

A fourth type of possible consent is what one could *humanly* consent to. There could be proposals one could not humanly consent to, by which I mean that they go against basic human needs we ascribe to all human beings. These might include survival, safety, bodily and psychological integrity, as well as the need for human relationships, or the development of rational capacities (cf. Maslow 1943). As with the other kinds of possible consent, it would be possible for someone to actually go against his basic needs, and consent to their violation. But any observer would understand that a human being could not normally consent to a violation of her basic needs. For instance, when a terrorist threatens to kill you or your family if you do not give him information, we might think of you as being a hero if you do not, but we do understand if you give in to fulfill your basic needs (of survival, having a family, etc.).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

A fifth kind of possible consent is what one could *culturally* consent to according to the rules of one's community. To a religious person, for instance, it might not even occur as a possibility to go against the doctrines of her faith. But physically and logically she could have acted differently. The requirements of what one can humanly or culturally consent to track norms that are objective in the sense that they are not solely based on the contingent, particular desires of an agent.11 In this sense, they give the other an input in a similar way as if we would respect and preserve a jewel or painting according to its nature.

Giving the other a voice, it seems to me, does foremost refer to actual consent. This can include personal projects it would be "*unthinkable*" (Williams 1973a: 92) or psychologically impossible for an individual to give up. Only this latter form, which is similar to actual consent, seems to be how the other has a direct voice. However, this is a more local form of respect that is only relevant for certain cases, but it is needed for the whole account.

### **6. The Nature of Respect**

Respect as a universal moral requirement, I have argued, contains at least two central elements: (1) One should treat others as having an equal importance, and—on that prior foundation—(2) in a way that they have a voice in how they are treated. What, more concretely, does this require?

I will leave (2) in the narrow sense aside here. I have argued that actual consent is of prime importance, for instance, in property cases—including questions about one's own body—but that it is not a universal criterion of respect that could apply to all cases. The wider sense of having a voice—what someone could possibly consent to morally, humanly, and culturally—refers back to treating someone as if they are of equal importance and points to (1). So, what, more specifically, does one have to do in order to treat others as if they are of equal importance?

The clue to finding a more universal criterion of respect, I think, lies in the condition that respect should also work at a distance, so to speak. The recent literature on respect sheds an important light on the role of second-person interaction for the practice of respect. For instance, if one owes an apology, it is often not enough to simply utter the word "sorry," but one should look the other person in the eye, and shake her hand when saying the word (cf. Darwall 2006: 140–143). However, again it does not seem to me that this form of respect is a universal form that applies to all cases. One also respects others if, for instance, one does not jump queues, pays one's taxes, and keeps socially distanced during a health pandemic. Some forms of respect do not require a second-personal touch, but work at a distance.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

In order to cover respect at a distance as well, it seems to me, a central element of respecting others is that one should act on certain principles (for example, of not jumping a queue, of paying one's taxes, or keeping socially distanced). Acting on principles, in turn, means that one should not make an exception to these principles.12 Not making an exception, I argue, is the first, formal requirement of respecting others. By sticking to the rules, one does not exalt oneself above others. In making an exception, one treats others as if they are bound by rules that do not apply to oneself. This is a form of exalting oneself: one behaves as if one is something better. It is the same as the requirement of what one can *morally* consent to, or the requirement of fairness.

However, by itself the first, formal requirement of respect, "do not make an exception," is not enough. This is because not every exception is morally objectionable. If you win at sports or get a job 200 others have applied for, you are the exception to the fact that 199 are not getting a job. But we do not think that this is immoral or disrespectful. We think that there should be a distinction between "being the exception" and "making an (unfair) exception." But we still need a criterion that distinguishes these cases. If it is only immoral to make an exception in some cases, but not in others, we still need a criterion that identifies the relevant difference. Think about the following example:

*Traffic Jam*: You are driving on the interstate, when you hear on the radio that there has been an accident ahead, and that you will soon encounter a traffic jam. You start weighing your options. You can wait in the traffic jam like most people do, you can leave the interstate and take a detour, or you can drive past the jam on the empty emergency lane.

If you leave the interstate to make a detour through the countryside, or if you drive on the emergency lane, in both cases you will make an exception to the generally accepted rule that people wait on the interstate until the accident is cleared. But only the exception to drive on the emergency lane seems immoral and disrespectful. What is the difference between the two cases? The difference, I gather, is that in the second case you make an exception to a rule that we believe to be objectively necessary. We believe that it is necessary to leave the emergency lane open so that first responders can quickly get to accident victims and save lives. By taking a detour through the countryside, you also make an exception, but since you are not breaking a necessary law, we do not think it to be morally objectionable.

There is, then, a twofold procedure to the criterion of respect: (1) Do not make an exception, (2) to rules that we believe to be objectively necessary. Other theories, it seems to me, also need both aspects if, for instance, they construe the universal grid of morality as a requirement to act on principles no one could reasonably reject, as a system of mutual accountability, or as principles one can rationally consent to (cf. Scanlon 1998: 106; Darwall 2006; Parfit 2011). These theories need, on the one hand, a substantive account of what no one could reasonably reject; when one can hold others to account; or what one could rationally consent to, and, on the other, the command not to violate these laws.13 However, which rules are objectively necessary? They are mostly determined, I shall argue, by what we can *humanly* and *culturally* consent to. (But, of course, there might be more elements at work.) Let us think about each case in turn.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

What we deem to be objectively necessary is in the first instance determined by human needs, such as a need for self-preservation, social interaction, and personal development. What we believe to be objectively necessary are the *means* to these objective needs. For instance, to satisfy the need of self-preservation it is objectively necessary to not randomly murder people. These means to fulfilling our needs can be formulated in principles.

Within this plurality of needs and the principles that serve them there also seems to be a (not fully specified) hierarchy among them. Think about the following example:

*Starving Monk*: A monk wants to build a monument to his god. He is starving, and on the brink of death. When you offer him food, he rejects it, and asks you to help him finish the monument instead. (Cf. Scanlon 1975: 659–660)

Getting food and being alive seems to be the necessary condition for satisfying any need at all, including the religious need of the monk to build a monument. This supports the intuition that we have a duty to offer food to the monk, but not to help him build a monument. There is a natural basis for what we deem important. But it is not clear that we have an objective list of needs that universally applies equally to all people, and we do not seem to have a fully spelled out hierarchy of needs. In addition, the principles that serve these needs can change. First, our knowledge of what serves needs can change. For instance, in a pandemic we might think that people should not congregate in groups larger than fifty in order to contain the spread of the disease, but later we might learn that the actual number is ten or two. Second, our situation can change. If the virus mutates, it might spread less easily, and the rules for protecting people might change.

How we weigh different needs themselves, it seems to me, is regulated by *cultural* norms, and arrangements in particular societies. A society might decide that life is more important than country, or social equality more important than individual property (cf. Prinz 2008: 69–72; Wong 2006). A particular society also might have needs another lacks, and it will determine how much freedom an individual has to prioritize her needs. What this means is that there is a limit to what philosophy can determine about our right conduct (cf. Timmons 2012). Philosophy can try to understand the structure of morality and criticize particular rules as unfair or ineffective. But the content of what is the basic framework of respect is largely an empirical theory that requires input from many disciplines such as psychology, sociology, anthropology, cultural studies, history, and so on. These sciences determine the rules we generally believe to be objectively necessary. Respect, I have argued, consists in not making an exception to these rules. But, of course, even if this is correct, my view invites immediate objections.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

### **7. Objections**

Against my account of respect as not making exceptions to necessary rules, one might object, first, that we do not want to be respected in such an impersonal matter—it is enough for the other to stick to rules—rather, we want to be respected for who we are (cf. Murdoch 1999: 215). While I agree that we care deeply about this kind of respect, it seems to be a different form than the moral kind. Consider the following case:

*Credit Card*: You call your credit card company to find out how much money you can spend this month before you reach your limit. The banker looks at your statement, and says: "I see that you did not buy a Valentine's gift this year, does this mean I can ask you out?"

It seems to me that—in our recent Western culture—most of the time, and by most people, we want to be treated fairly as one equal among others. When we buy a train ticket, ask about our bank account, or visit a pharmacy, we do not want to get a personal treatment. There are times when we want to be respected for who we are. We want our parents, partners, and children to be proud of who we are and what we are doing. But this applies to people who are close to us, and it is a form of appraisal respect, *reverentia*, not recognition respect, *observantia*.

The second objection lays further requirements on the agent. According to it, it is not enough to follow a universally necessary rule in order to respect someone, but one also has to convey that one regards the other as an equal. For instance, we mentioned that in apologizing it is often not enough to merely utter "sorry," but one should also look her in the eye, shake her hand, etc. (cf. Darwall 2006: 140–143). This point emphasizes an important aspect of our lives. We care deeply about the quality of will others have toward us (cf. Strawson 1962). If someone wrongs us, it is not just enough to hear "sorry," and maybe get reparations, but we want to know that the other does not carry further ill will toward us.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 31/03/21, SPi**

The question is whether this is a universal requirement we have. If someone does not jump a queue, is it important to you that the other also conveys that they regard you as an equal? If so, then it seems that respect does come with an additional requirement. It would not just be enough to follow necessary laws, but one would also have to convey one's regard to the other. My feeling is that this is not a universal requirement. We do care very much whether people who are close to us, and people whose opinion of us is important to ourselves, regard us as equals. But with regard to everyone else, we care that we get the prescription in a pharmacy when it is our turn, and that we are not overcharged, etc. If that is true, then the requirement to communicate—in addition to my behavior—that I have an attitude of regarding the other as an equal is local in character. It is extremely important to us in some cases, but it is not a universal requirement. But I might be wrong.

### **8. Conclusion**

We have many different ideas about respect. We often feel strongly about them, but I have argued that many only apply to a small well-defined subset of cases. They are local in character. My aim in this chapter was to analyze our intuitions in regard to a universal requirement of respect, a fundamental requirement that we should display always and toward all human beings. I have argued that our main intuition of respect consists in two elements that are part of this fundamental grid. One should treat others in a way as if they have equal importance, and in a way that they have a voice in how they are treated. Respect, then, consists in not making exceptions to rules we believe to be objectively necessary, or so I have argued.14

### **Notes**

- 1. See "respect, n. (and int.)." OED Online. June 2020. Oxford University Press. [https://](https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/163779?rskey=TY50DE&result=1&isAdvanced=false) [www.oed.com/view/Entry/163779?rskey=TY50DE&result=1&isAdvanced=false](https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/163779?rskey=TY50DE&result=1&isAdvanced=false)  (accessed June 28, 2020).
- 2. This is Simon Blackburn's example.
- 3. All Kant translations are from his *Practical Philosophy*, edited by Mary Gregor (Cambridge University Press, 1996). Page numbers refer to the volume: page of the Academy edition of *Kants Gesammelte Schriften* (de Gruyter, 1902–).
- 4. Some Kantians agree with this. Kant himself, however, twice uses "not merely as a means" to distinguish perfect and narrow duties from weaker duties to also treat them as ends in themselves (Kant 1996: 4:429–430, 6:449–450).

- 5. A Kantian might reply that this behavior is forbidden because you are not treating the bystanders as ends in themselves. However, I find this reading less plausible as a Kant interpretation (see note 4). Additionally, these two examples equally rule out the Kant reading that what is forbidden is to use someone as a causal means to fulfilling *my desires* or ends (cf. Kant 1996: 6:450).
- 6. There are further important discussions about whether consent has to be affirmative, or whether one could also consent by omission (cf. Pallikkathayil 2020).
- 7. This point seems more plausible if there is little cost to the owner of the car: I get it back, it is not damaged, etc. The precise degree to which the costs are acceptable seems to differ from society to society, cf. section 6 below.
- 8. Cf. the real 2001 case of the "Cannibal of Rotenburg."
- 9. Cf. [https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichJuriAdmin.do?oldAction=rechJuriAdmin&](https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichJuriAdmin.do?oldAction=rechJuriAdmin&idTexte=CETATEXT000007877723) [idTexte=CETATEXT000007877723](https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichJuriAdmin.do?oldAction=rechJuriAdmin&idTexte=CETATEXT000007877723) (published October 27, 1994; last accessed June 29, 2020).
- 10. Immanuel Kant, *On the Common Saying: That May Be Correct in Theory, but It Is of No Use in Practice*, 8:297n.
- 11. My use of "objective" here is not intended as a meta-ethical claim about the metaphysical basis of these norms.
- 12. If we discover circumstances in which someone could have a good reason to break a rule, e.g., in emergencies, then we would have to come up with more fine-grained rules.
- 13. Notice that this framework could also be extended to respect for marginal cases: We can have objective rules for what is necessary for small children or elderly demented persons. We should then not make exceptions to these rules.
- 14. For their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this essay I would like to thank audiences in Bochum, Chapel Hill, Melbourne, Munich, New Orleans, San Antonio, San Diego, Tokyo, and an online conference hosted in Bristol. I want to especially thank Richard Dean, Melissa Seymour Fahmy, Martin Sticker, and Mark Timmons for their detailed written comments on this essay.

### **References**

- Darwall, Stephen, 1977. "Two Kinds of Respect." *Ethics* 88: 36–49.
- Darwall, Stephen, 2006. *The Second-Person Standpoint*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Dillon, Robin, 2015. "Humility, Arrogance, and Self-Respect in Kant and Hill." In: *Reason, Value and Respect*, ed. Mark Timmons and Robert Johnson, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Feinberg, Joel, 1973. "Some Conjectures about the Concept of Respect." *Social Philosophy* 4: 1–3.
- Hill, Thomas, 1973. "Servility and Self-Respect." *The Monist* 57: 87–104.
- Kant, Immanuel, 1996. *Practical Philosophy*, ed. and trans. Mary Gregor, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

- Kleingeld, Pauline, forthcoming. "A Kantian Solution to the Trolley Problem." In: *Oxford Studies in Normative Ethics*, ed. Mark Timmons, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Korsgaard, Christine, 1996. *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Maslow, Abraham, 1943. "A Theory of Human Motivation." *Psychological Review* 50 (4): 370–396.
- Murdoch, Iris, 1999. "The Sublime and the Good." In: *Existentialists and Mystics*, ed. Peter Conrad, New York: Penguin Books.
- O'Neill, Onora, 1989. *Constructions of Reason*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- O'Neill, Onora, 2002. *Autonomy and Trust in Bioethics*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Pallikkathayil, Japa, 2020. "Consent to Sexual Interactions." *Politics, Philosophy and Economics* 19 (2): 107–127.
- Parfit, Derek, 2011. *On What Matters,* Vol. 1, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Prinz, Jesse, 2008. *The Emotional Construction of Morality*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Rawls, John, 2000. *Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Scanlon, Thomas, 1975. "Preference and Urgency." *The Journal of Philosophy* 72 (19): 655–669.
- Scanlon, Thomas, 1998. *What We Owe to Each Other*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Scanlon, Thomas, 2008. *Moral Dimensions*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Shafer-Landau, Russ, 2003. *Moral Realism*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Strawson, Peter, 1962. "Freedom and Resentment." *Proceedings of the British Academy* 48: 1–25.
- Timmons, Mark, 2012. *Moral Theory*, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
- Williams, Bernard, 1973a. "A Critique of Utilitarianism." In: *Utilitarianism For and Against*, ed. J. J. C. Smart and Bernard Williams, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Williams, Bernard, 1973b. *Problems of the Self*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Williams, Bernard, 1985. *Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Wong, David, 2006. *Natural Moralities*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Wood, Allen, 1999. *Kant's Ethical Thought*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.