# 1. **Respect**: A History

*Remy Debes*

Respect is a knotty concept. Derived from the Latin *respicere* ("to look round or back," "to notice," "to pay attention to"), its English-language lifespan is marked by scores of connotations, some of which cut in distinctly different directions.1 Even after we delimit our interest to the subject of this volume, respect for persons, we must still work through the much-discussed distinction between "appraisal" and "recognition" forms of respect (Darwall 1977). The first names a positive evaluative attitude expressed towards a person for some character merit, moral or non-moral, such as her chess skills or industry or benevolence. In this sense, respect is similar to admiration or esteem, and carries connotations of honor and awe. It is something we *feel* towards another person. The second, by contrast, names a way of *thinking* about others. It is a deliberative disposition to give appropriate weight to some feature of a person in deciding how to act in relation to her.2 By adapting our choices or plans in light of the given feature, we show that we "recognize" the person in question. In this sense, respect connotes "heed," "consideration," "concern," or "deference."

Making matters more complicated, notice that the possible features of a person which might ground such recognition respect are diverse. It could be a person's feelings about a political issue, their social status, or their professional rank. Indeed, any fact about a person that one might take as a reason for choosing one plan or action over another is a candidate for showing recognition respect. For example, you can show recognition respect to your taller opponent's greater reach, by deciding to position yourself an extra step away, or by swapping your sword for a spear. Most relevant to the subject of this volume, however, is to consider the way we call on one another to adapt our plans or choices in light of the basic worth or dignity of human beings. When we do this—when we take a person's human dignity as the relevant feature for revising or foregoing our plans or choices—we respect persons *as* persons. Or, as we sometimes say, "just because" they are persons. Call this the *moralized* connotation of recognition respect.

This semantic tangle, however, isn't the main challenge for investigating the history of respect. For those interested in the moralized concept of respect, especially as it figures in the anglophone world, there is a much harder question. Namely, how did we get to this point? For, the simple fact is that until the twentieth century, the *term* "respect" had almost no currency as *meaning* "recognition for persons as persons." Early dictionary entries, for example, from Noah Webster (1828), to Samuel Johnson (1755), to John Kersey (1702), explain respect only through its appraisal connotations.3 Or consider that throughout the nineteenth century, suffragists and abolitionists spoke of "respect" almost entirely in appraisal terms4—a norm validated at least as late as the 1900 edition of *Webster's International Dictionary*.5 Indeed, the only "recognition" connotations of respect that this edition of *Webster's* includes are marked by a centuries old sense of giving *partial* consideration to a particular person or group, which was entrenched into English from prominent biblical passages such as Acts 10:34: "God is no respecter of persons."6 So, again, what explains the revolution in meaning that produced our current moralized notion of respect? The following chapter offers some preliminary answers to this question.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **1. A Puzzle in Two Parts**

From a contemporary, western viewpoint the moralized concept of respect is not simply familiar, it is fundamental. Most of us believe we owe respect to persons in virtue of some unearned status or worth or "dignity" that all humans enjoy equally, and we believe this respect should express itself, at least partly, in our practical deliberations. Of course, we may disagree on how to explain the relevant "status" or "worth" that supposedly commands such respect. In turn, we may disagree about exactly what it takes to respect persons *as* persons. Nevertheless, most of us agree that some such respect is owed to persons, and again, owed equally. Indeed, this principle of equal regard is so fundamental today, it is often treated as "properly basic." That is, it is treated as needing no justification, in the sense that the principle marks a boundary of reasonable disagreement.7

In fact, then, there are two general questions to ask about the history of moralized respect for persons. First, there is a question about origins, and it has two parts. On the one hand, we can ask how the term "respect" came to connote "recognition for persons as persons" in the first place. On the other hand, given its relative youth, we can ask whether a *concept* of "recognition for persons as persons" existed before it was subsumed under the *terminology* of "respect." And if so, did the older form of the idea imply or entail the same idea of moral personhood that it does today? In other words, even if we find older versions of the idea that we must respect the basic worth of persons, what conception of the person did these ideas trade on? These are the primary questions of this chapter.

Second, one might also want to ask how the moralized concept of "respect" gained so wide a currency once it was introduced. That is, how did the concept and its attending principle become so ubiquitous that it could plausibly be said to be "properly basic"? It is easy to underestimate both questions, though for different reasons. Let me explain, starting with the second. In the next section, I turn back to my main interest, the question of origins—especially, the modern origins of our moralized concept of respect for persons.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

It isn't difficult to guess some of the major events that helped transform and widen the concept of respect into our present-day ethos of respect. We might start with the new "virtual cosmopolitism" of social media, or perhaps turn-ofthe-century new waves in feminism, queer studies, and race theory. We would certainly discuss the rise of Kantian egalitarianism that followed intellectual moguls like Rawls and Dworkin. We would note the 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act and 1972 passage of Title IX. We would examine "the Sixties" cultural revolution, the contemporaneous American civil rights movement, and "second wave" feminism. We would reflect on global reactions to the Holocaust, such as UNESCO's 1950 *The Race Question* or the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the latter of which was able simply to assert "the inherent dignity" of "all members of the human family," in turn pledging "the promotion of universal respect."8 We might consider the linked 1930s Supreme Court decisions *Powell v. Alabama* and *Norris v. Alabama*, which twice checked the racist climate of the Jim Crow south,9 or the influence of various literary movements like the Harlem Renaissance. We might also muse on the influence of music. Prior to 1930, for example, the "Blues" was referred to as "coon shouting." But that term quickly faded after the genre's popularization by singers like Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey (Abbot and Serrof 2017: 175). And looking even farther back, we would consider turn-of-the-century social agitations like socialism and the "first wave" of feminism, which, in the long press for women's suffrage, famously picketed the 1920 Republican Convention with a banner quoting Susan B. Anthony, "No self-respecting woman should wish or work for the success of a party that ignores her" (Harper 1898: 416–417, 794).10

However, if these events and many more like them are easy to name, there is a complicating aspect to all such history. At every point in its post-modern development the principle of equal regard has been blatantly, violently, and systematically flouted across all western nations. Examples abound, but the recent rise of the "Black Lives Matter" movement in America is especially instructive. Formed by three black women in reaction to the 2013 acquittal of George Zimmerman in the fatal shooting of seventeen-year-old Trayvon Martin, the movement gained international attention as it grew into the rally cry to protest an ensuing series of highly publicized, thus far largely judicially protected, and sadly still ongoing killing of unarmed black men and women. Consequently, "Black Lives Matter" has also become a reminder of the jagged rift between the liberal canons that inform the egalitarian public identity of America and the lived experience of its black citizens—a rift as old as America itself. As Thurgood Marshall once noted, the seminal opening of the US Constitution, "We the People," today looks like an act of false consciousness: "When the Founding Fathers used this phrase in 1787," Marshall memorably wrote, "they did not have in mind the majority of America's citizens. 'We the People,' included in the words of the framers, "the whole Number of free Persons" (Marshall, 1987). In other words, Marshall meant, it meant *white* people.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

To reiterate, the history of anti-black racism in America is only one example. The broader point is this: After we compose the narrative to explain how the concept of recognition respect evolved into our current ethos of respect, there remains the *critical* history of respect. How should we understand this ethos, its history, our present conviction in it, and any confidence we presume in deploying the moralized concept of respect itself, given that this ethos and our conceptual confidence are thoroughly entwined with a legacy of brutal hypocrisy that belies the very principles in question?

This is a fraught question, and I must reserve my more comprehensive effort to answer it to a different space.11 In the remainder of this chapter, I attempt only to put into place a few crucial pieces of that broader answer, as it connects specifically to the question of historical origins that I outlined above.

### **2. Immanuel Kant and the Usual Half-Truth**

Hypocrisy challenges the whole history of moralized respect, right down to its origins. However, the first order of business when it comes to the question of origins is correcting a widespread half-truth. It features Immanuel Kant, and goes something like this:

In 1785 Kant revolutionized the concept of respect when he argued that his foundational moral principle, the "Categorical Imperative," could be understood through an alternative formulation: "*So act that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means*" (Kant 1996: 80 [4:429]). For, the reason persons must be cognized as ends, and never merely as a means, is that persons are autonomous: they are "laws unto themselves." It thus follows that persons are (or should be) cognized as a limit to rational choice. In turn, persons exact or demand respect from us when properly cognized. Kant writes:

[R]ational beings are called *persons* because their nature already marks them out as an end itself, that is, as something that may not be used merely as a means, and hence so far limits all choice (and is an object of respect).

(Kant 1996: 79 [4:428])

The origin of our moralized concept of respect is thus at hand. Between Kant's massive influence on German thought and subsequent translation into English and influence on the anglophone tradition, "respect" was forever bonded to its central moralized connotation as recognition for persons as persons. Indeed, should we further ask where Kant sourced his own innovations on respect, even here scholars have a ready answer. Kant was inspired by his French predecessor, Jean-Jacques Rousseau. "Rousseau set me right about this," Kant confessed, adding that he learned from Rousseau "to honor humanity" (*Menschen ehren*). More importantly, Kant implied he learned that it was this very attitude—this attitude of *honoring* humanity—that "gives worth to all others in establishing the rights of humanity" (Kant 1996: xvii [20:44]).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Alas, as an answer to the question of origins, the foregoing story isn't even just-so. To be sure, Kant's influence can't be ignored. At a minimum, his choice to use *Achtung* to name the fitting attitude towards what limits rational choice, conjoined with his argument that persons are or represent such a limit, is an essential piece of the origin story.12 In Kant's day, *Achtung—*like the English word "respect"—was dominated by connotations of literal attention (to something) and appraisal (especially of a person's character). The influential German *Wörterbuch der hochdeutschen Mundart* (*Dictionary of the High German Dialect*), for example, which was published contemporaneously with Kant's *Groundwork*, defines *Achtung* this way:

Derived from "achten" (pay attention to) 1) without an article and for the most part used with the verb "give" almost the equivalent of "attention" and 2 "Acht" "heeding" in everyday life. To pay attention to something...2) The inner judgment about someone else's strengths and accomplishments, both active and passive. (Adelung 1793: 155–156)

But as an attitude towards persons, Kant opposed *Achtung* to any such appraisal. This was a bold shift in meaning, one for which Kant is certainly owed credit. Nevertheless, it is only one part of the story—and an exaggerated part at that.

For a start, Kant himself occasionally appealed to *Achtung*'s older connotation of "attention," which raises a question about whether or to what extent Kant took himself to be innovating on the meaning of *Achtung*.13 Relatedly, whatever change Kant did make to *Achtung* was at most a revision—not a reinvention. The *Wörterbuch* definition, for example, although primarily in terms of attention and appraisal, already has elements of recognition in it. Furthermore, Kant's innovations weren't definitively reflected in general language usage until around the middle of the next century, when an 1854 dictionary first credits him in its definition of *Achtung*.14 Granted, taken on their own, these considerations would demand only a little historical rethinking, as opposed to serious revision. However, when we turn to the English-language context it is ultimately clear that we should *not* start with Kant. Not only did Kant have sparing influence on British thought before 1830, but what influence he did have both before and after this point was variously circumscribed.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

In England, all early discussion of Kant took place outside the university in the pages of popular literary journals. And while Kant enjoyed a brief flash of popularity in these journals at the very end of the eighteenth century, what was conveyed in them was greatly simplified, even trivialized. Moreover, there was little discussion of his ethics, with most attention given to his theoretical, theological, and political views—the last mostly based on his essay *Perpetual Peace.* And in this last respect Kant ended up seeming a radical with dangerous Jacobite leaning. By the close of the century, the English public had become rather suddenly conservative and nationalistic with a growing suspicion of German Enlightenment thought and culture (Micheli 2005: 202–314; Copleston 1966: 148–154). And so it was that, despite a brief fascination with Kant, already by 1798 the influential *Critical Review* complained that "[t]he philosophy of Kant is little known in this country."15 Indeed, after 1806 Kant's name virtually disappeared from English periodicals for decades (Micheli 2005: 202–314).16 Translations of Kant's work, which had already been scarce, were not in demand. His practical philosophy was especially slow to find its way into English. In particular, the *Groundwork* was not professionally translated into English until 1836, when J. W. Semple, a Scotsman, offered the first serious edition.17 And even this translation was not easily accessible until a revised edition appeared in 1869, "at a third of the original price," and featuring a new introduction for students—notably authored by another Scotsman, Henry Calderwood.18 In fact, what scholarly interest in Kant did exist in the first half of the nineteenth century was mostly contained to Scotland (Burns 2009: 115–131). Taken all together, then, whatever influence Kant had on anglophone moral philosophy, let alone the anglophone concept of respect in general, must have been slight before 1870, if not much later—at which late point Kant ironically would have competed with his successors, especially Hegel and Marx.19

However, and what is now crucial to note, by this point the English-language transformation of "respect" was already underway—albeit, not always where one might expect. Thus, most nineteenth-century abolitionists and suffragists, as I noted once before, did not couch their arguments in the *language* of moralized respect, even when they plainly had the *idea* in mind. For example, in his 1830 abolitionist pamphlet, the *Appeal, in Four Articles*, David Walker explicitly attacked the hypocrisy of American principles of equality, writing in direct reply to Thomas Jefferson, "I am after those who know and feel, that we are MEN, as well as other people." And yet, Walker's argument is never framed in the moralized terminology of respect. Similarly, in her 1850 protest against slavery, *A Plea*  *for the Oppressed*, Lucy Stanton insisted that "Humanity is a unit, he who injures one individual wrongs the race." She added that the moral goal is "to love one's neighbor as one's self " (Stanton 1850: 208).20 In making these claims, Stanton plainly has a moralized concept of respect for persons in mind. She's articulating the *idea* that each person matters equally in some fundamental sense, and correspondingly requires appropriate recognition by others. Nevertheless, the language is different. *A Plea for the Oppressed* nowhere uses the *term* "respect," or even its close cognates like "regard" or "recognition."

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Or consider Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, arguably still the most famous first-wave feminists. They never explicitly demand "equal respect" for women or even "respect for women," not where that language might connote moralized respect. Instead, when they speak explicitly of "respect" for women or woman's "self-respect" (a frequent topic), it's always in the appraisal sense (see e.g. Stanton p. 192, in DuBois 1992). Anthony and Cady Stanton defend the qualities of a woman's character that should *win* respect from men, or from themselves. At best, Anthony and Cady Stanton sometimes use the terminology of respect to connote recognition for social status—that is, for the *typical* social role women play or could play if given the chance. But this kind of recognition respect is compatible with one's thinking that not all women, let alone all persons, are in fact owed respect. Indeed, it is now widely known that Cady Stanton's work was marked by racist rhetoric.21

However, if these examples suggest that the concept of moralized respect was alive but only in ways that were disconnected from the terminology of "respect," elsewhere we find some signs of a semantic shift in language as well. Some of this change appears under the rhetoric of political rights or privileges, in contexts that imply the rights in question belong to all people equally. For example, the *Oxford English Dictionary* cites Thomas Macaulay's widely read 1849 *History of England* in this way: "Lewis had, like James, repeatedly promised to respect the privileges of his Protestant subjects." More splendidly, John Stuart Mill, in his 1869 *The Subjection of Women—*which he largely credited to his wife, Harriet—argued that the era of "chivalrous" morality was over. In the modern era, Mill wrote, respect for women no longer depended on the intersection of the "brave" man of honor and the "submissive" virtues of women. But also—and crucially—neither did it depend on what a woman might accomplish. Thus Mill criticizes a mistake in "the modern movement of morals and politics," which assumes that "conduct, and conduct alone, entitles to *respect*; that not what men are, but what they do, constitutes their claim to deference; that, above all, merit, and not birth, is the only rightful claim to power and authority" (Mill 2002: 209). Instead, Mill argues, "The main foundations of the moral life of modern times must be justice and prudence; the *respect* of each for the rights of every other" (Mill 2002: 213, 223–224). Or consider James Rapier, who, in his address to the US Congress in support of the 1875 Civil Rights Act, opened with a confession of embarrassment for having to petition, "hat in hand," as one man to another, for rights which the other man already enjoys. Indeed, Rapier added, it is shameful that *any* person should plea for recognition before America, the supposed "asylum of the oppressed," only to be told that "he has no civil rights that another class is bound to respect" (Rapier 2006: 58).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

These are striking uses of the terminology of "respect," which, given the timeline and contexts, could not plausibly be credited to Kant's influence. Nor was this development limited to the context of rights. For example, two central facets of first-wave feminism as it was being developed beyond the specific question of suffrage involved, on the one hand, *throwing off* the earned (appraisal) respect that comes through the chivalry of men; and, on the other hand, *taking on* a more robust moralized language of "respect" that implied "respect for persons as persons." Thus, in an 1854 letter to Susan B. Anthony, fellow activist Lucy Stone lamented the criticism she suffered for wearing the newly invented "bloomers":

Women are in bondage. Their clothes are a great hindrance to their engaging in any business which will make them pecuniarily independent. . .[I]s it not better, even at the expense of a great deal of annoyance, that they whose *lives deserves respect* and are greater than their garments should give an example by which woman may more easily work out her own emancipation? (Harper 1898: 116)

Stone's focus on the "lives" of women (reminiscent of Mill's point about "birth") is precisely the sort of unearned basis that fits with a concept of respect for persons as persons. Or consider the American black scholar and feminist Anna Julia Cooper, who was particularly explicit on this point. Writing on "Womanhood" in 1886, she laments, "Respect for woman, the much lauded chivalry of the Middle Ages, meant what I fear it still means to some men in our own day—respect for the elect few among whom they expect to consort" (Cooper 2017: 15). In short, prior to the anglophone uptake of Kantian moral theory, the moralized concept of respect was already being expressed in a variety of contexts, sometimes even explicitly in the terminology of "respect," albeit in an unsystematic way.

So, what now? It is tempting to try to track down the inspiration of individual thinkers. What caused Cooper, Alcott, Stone, Rapier, or Mill, for instance, to think about the moralized concept of respect literally in *terms* of "respect"? But this is not the direction I shall take. Given the multiplying number of actors, it's no longer clear that this is what we need to advance a meaningful history of respect. I say this for two reasons.

First, we can guess the general explanation without the specifics. Probably, the terminological transformation was a mix of organic change and accident. Organically, through the slow union of many individuals who were more or less conscientiously, and more or less independently, rethinking the literal meaning of respect; and, accidentally, through a kind of association. That is, during this time non-moralized, appraisal connotations of respect were being used in conceptual spaces befitting the *idea* of "respect for persons as persons." For example, we noted that first-wave feminists frequently use the language of "self-respect" cashed out in appraisal connotations of earned merit; but they did so in close connection to arguments for equal rights, political equality, and so on. Plausibly, then, although the *intension* of this "self-respect" talk was about woman's earned merits or character, the *extension* was, in a word, their human dignity. Consequently, this talk of "self-respect" was plausibly if indirectly and slowly associated with an idea of "recognition for persons as persons."

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Second, if the change was a combination of organic and accidental change, then tracking down any particular thinker's exact inspiration has dubious value for answering my overarching question, namely, about origins. Instead, in light of my foregoing argument exposing the half-truth about Kant's role, it now seems more productive to try to map the broader, general historical moments where explicit rethinking or conceptual proximity did or may have occurred. The upshot will be a tale of untidy origins, but it will be closer to the truth.22

### **3. Early Modern Moments**

The early modern period is usually dated *c.*1550–1800. But the conceptual history of respect makes more sense if we draw the cutoff closer to 1850, technically making what follows a review of "earlier" modern history. In any event, it bears repeating that throughout this earlier period, the English term "respect" was used almost exclusively for its appraisal connotation, the old Latin sense of "attention," or the non-moral sense of partial regard. And yet, this same time period, and especially the European Enlightenment (*c.*1650–1800), was marked by a long series of intertwined social agitations and outright revolutions that culminated in egalitarian proclamations so famous they almost need no mention, from the English Bill of Rights (1689) to the US Declaration of Independence (1776) to the French Declaration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen (1789). These doctrines trumpeted most loudly the fundamental political equality of men, but behind this political equality was the idea of a basic *moral* status, or dignity, that all human beings possess equally. And this helps cut through the possibilities for where we might go looking for the moralized *idea* of respect in earlier modern history, despite the fact that the term "respect" was then dominated by various non-moral connotations.

First, a word of caution: In the early modern period, there are countless texts that evince calls for social justice and thus *might* harbor the concept of respect for persons. However, not all find an easy place in a history of moralized respect. This is because we also often find a claim or implication that those on the losing side of justice—women, slaves, the working class, etc.—are in principle able to *earn* equal respect on the grounds of their equal capabilities, especially the capabilities of intellect and wit (at least, assuming proper education). But the basic worth of human beings is not something one earns. So, we must try to track down works that combine some call for social justice with the concept of basic human worth. The question thus becomes, how do we do this? More exactly, what terms can we use to do this work, if "respect" itself isn't a reliable guide?

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Unfortunately, not "dignity." The term "dignity," like the term "respect," did not acquire its current moralized currency until around 1900.23 However, one does find a cluster of related concepts from "human race" and "humanity," to "man" and "mankind," to "fellow" and "brethren"—the last perhaps better remembered in the French revolutionary motto "Liberté, égalité, fraternité." Or consider the term "neighbor." One finds considerable discussion of this term in contexts that recall both the idea of human dignity and respect. Romans 13:9, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," is a prime example. Bishop Butler made this dictate the subject of two of his *Fifteen Sermons* (1726), which became one of the most influential texts in nineteenth-century British thought (Butler 1983: 3). At one point, Butler brings the Christian dictate to bear against the seductive "spirit of party" that throughout history has led men to make fundamental divisions in humankind:

And as wrath and fury and overbearing upon these occasions proceed, as I may speak, from men's feeling only on their own side, so common a feeling, for others as well as for ourselves, would render us sensible to this truth—which it is strange can have so little influence—*that we ourselves differ from others just as much as they do from us*. (Butler 1983: 64)

Or consider Adam's Smith's fundamental justice dictate from *The Theory of Moral Sentiments* (1759):

There can be no proper motive for hurting our neighbor, there can be no incitement to do evil to another, which mankind will go along with, except just indignation for evil which that other has done to us. (Smith 1982: II.ii.1.10)

For Smith, the "neighbor" describes a person with whom we have no special relation. It is the "anyone"—or, as Smith reformulates it in the second clause of the foregoing quote, the indefinite "another." Indeed, given the generality implied by the term "mankind," Smith's justice dictate thus amounts to a claim about the perspective "anyone" has on "anyone else." Although the term "respect" does not appear, this passage suggests a kind of recognition between persons that is manifestly reminiscent of our contemporary ideas of dignity and the principle of equal regard. Smith's dictate protects all persons equally and pays no attention to whether any of the agents involved is rich or poor, man or woman, native or foreign.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Now a caveat. Whenever one fans the flame of righteousness in the name of humanity but goes in for the oppression of any part of humankind, we must look askance. Correspondingly, the closer we come to the concept of human dignity the more vigilant we must be about possible hypocrisy. Once again, a *critical* history must inform our interpretation, and a new caution must guide our narration. The prime example for my warning in the present context is John Locke, and the social contract tradition centered around him.

Locke's ideas directly influenced all the major egalitarian proclamations in England, France, and the United States we noted earlier. The first words of his 1689 *Two Treatises on Government* decry slavery. The first paragraph of that work rejects patriarchalism, which aims, in Locke's words, "to provide Chains for all Mankind" (Locke 1988: 141).24 And among the accomplishments of the first *Treatise*, Locke claims to have shown that, "in the Races of Mankind and Families of the World, there remains not to one above another, the least pretense to be the Eldest House, and to have the Right of Inheritance" (Locke 1988: 267). Most important, the cornerstone of his social contract theory is his claim that the "natural" state of humans is a "*State of perfect Freedom*": "A *State* also of *Equality*, wherein all the Power and Jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another" (Locke 1988: 269). Clearly, then, Locke offers tempting ground for locating a forerunner to our contemporary concept of equal respect. And yet, Locke also provides the grounds to question his *value* as a source for such a concept.

Locke was financially invested in the slave trade through several enterprises, one of which, from 1672 to 1688, transported almost ninety thousand slaves. He served in a few different administrative roles for organizations dedicated to the management of new world plantations. And there is strong evidence he took personal interest in the writing of *The Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina*, which codified protections for slavery. Thus, his handwriting has been documented among the corrections to an early draft, including article 101: "Every freeman of Carolina shall have absolute power and Authority over his Negro Slaves, of what opinion Religion so ever" (Bernasconi and Mann 2005: 89–107).

So, given the hypocrisy in thinkers usually taken as early champions of "humanity" and "equality," perhaps we're better served by pushing our inquiry outside the usual canons. Those canons will always be important to a full understanding of the liberal tradition. But the time is overdue for expanding the standard account. For, Locke is hardly alone in having his egalitarian legacy challenged. David Hume's philosophy, for example, though dotted with some of the most tender remarks about human nature during the Enlightenment, and an inspiration to recent feminists, is complicated by a particularly noxious comment on the "natural inferiority" of negroes that continues to challenge interpreters. Rousseau, for all his ingenious criticism of the artificial corruptions of society, recommended the subordination of women in the infamous Book V of *Emile*. And that oft-cited champion of respect, Immanual Kant—he quoted Hume's racist remark as one part of his own sustained anthropological arguments for the superiority of whites: "Humanity," Kant summarizes at one point, "is at its greatest perfection in the race of the whites." These are only some of many possible examples, and enough to motivate a different approach.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **4. Outside the Canon**

In the last few decades, there has been a surge of effort to reclaim the historical early modern contributions of women, and, in turn, a rethinking about the origins of feminism. The history of respect further testifies to these efforts, though once again, not necessarily where one first thinks to look. So, consider: the usual paradigm of avant-garde feminism is Mary Wollstonecraft's 1792 *Vindication of the Rights of Women*, and one can appreciate why. Besides its then-striking title, Wollstonecraft advertises the work in the dedicatory letter explicitly as an argument to "respect" the "rights of women." And there certainly are intriguing moments that suggest the concept of moralized respect, as when she warns women against indulging the "hollow respect" of men that is based on regard for their youthful beauty. Instead they should demand "that reciprocation of civility which the dictates of humanity and the politeness of civilization authorise between man and man" (Wollstonecraft 1792: 131). However, closer examination reveals a more contentious case.

The language of respect in *Vindication* turns out to be almost entirely in contexts of appraisal, and Wollstonecraft delivers an argument to match. Thus, her driving goal is for women to "exact" respect, by cultivating their "abilities and virtue," especially those of intellect as opposed to beauty (Wollstonecraft 1792: 72). In this respect Wollstonecraft carried forward the then-dominant line of feminist argument, running from fifteenth-century texts like Thomas Elyot's 1545 *The Defense of Good Women*, to more empowered sixteenth-century texts like Marie De Gournay's 1622 *L'Égalité des Hommes et des Femmes,* or Mary Astell's 1694 *A Serious Proposal to the Ladies*.25 This vein of early feminist thinking was undoubtedly important, especially as an instrument for social reform. But they were not discussions of moralized respect for persons as persons. Furthermore, in her later historical analysis of the French Revolution, Wollstonecraft revealed a vitriolic hostility towards the struggle of lower-class women totally inconsistent with the moralized idea of respect for persons. Describing the 1794 Woman's March on Versailles—a critical catalyst in the Revolution—she described the crowd as consisting, "mostly of market women, and the lowest refuse of the streets. . .strictly speaking, a mob, affixing all the odium to the appellation it can possibly import." Wollstonecraft went so far as to label them "a set of monsters" and "brutes" (Wollstonecraft 1795; Draper 2013: 87).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

One way to sidestep this hypocrisy about class is to turn to early socialism, which was emerging just as Wollstonecraft was finishing. As a bona fide political movement, socialism is often credited to the French thinker Henri de Saint-Simon (1760–1825). Although Saint-Simon enjoyed little influence in his own life, his ideas about labor and class influenced a variety of early nineteenthcentury thinkers towards their own egalitarian views, some specifically with respect to their views on women (Saint-Simon 1817: 54). For example, Mill says he became acquainted with Saint-Simon in 1829 through the writings of Simon's followers before they "organized their scheme of Socialism," and was enamored by their feminist stance (Mill 1981: 199).26 Mill writes at one point: "In proclaiming the perfect equality of men and women, and an entirely new order of things in regard to their relations with one another, the St. Simonians. . .have entitled themselves to the grateful remembrance of future generations."

Saint-Simon also influenced Anna Wheeler and William Thompson, two other actors at the center of early socialist agitation for women's rights in Britain. Their thought culminated in the 1825 *Appeal of one Half of the Human Race, Women, against the pretension of the other Half, Men—*a work penned by Thompson, but according to Thompson really a joint effort. The title itself illustrates the close connection between the kind of language clustered around the evolving concept of human dignity and the language clustered around the evolving concept of respect. And this connection was brought home by Wheeler and Thompson's admonishment of James Mill (John Stuart Mill's father) that he failed to understand his mentor, Jeremy Bentham: "[T]he philosophy of that enlightened and benevolent man [Bentham], embraces in its grasp every *sentient human being*, and acknowledges the claim of *every rational adult*, without distinction of sex or colour, to equal political rights. Is the authority of the disciple above that of the master?"(Mill 1981: 9–10).27

Other early feminist developments in the concept of respect were taking place in literature. Theorists too often ignore literature, to the detriment of minority voices. Women and racial minorities, especially black people, have long faced trenchant and invidiously passive barriers in disciplines like philosophy. But literature has proven more receptive, relatively speaking. Thus we must look there if we want to capture contributions to the history of moral and political thought by marginalized peoples. The status of women, for example, has been the subject of novels as long as women have been writing. As befits literature, this is often expressed indirectly, ironically, and critically. Relatively recent examples such as Jane Austen and Charlotte Brontë, writing in the first half of the nineteenth century, jump quickly to mind. Jane Eyre's famous exchange with Rochester after he announces his intent to marry another is especially memorable in this regard: "Do you think I am an automaton?—a machine without feelings?. . .I am not talking to you now through the medium of custom, conventionalities, nor even of mortal flesh: it is my spirit that addresses your spirit; just as if both had passed through the grave, and we stood at God's feet, equal—as we are!" (Brontë 2001: 215–216). This passage is also important in the way that it connects moral personhood with human passions. The "academic" side of early feminism, from Wollstonecraft and Anna Wheeler to Susan B. Anthony and Cady Stanton, typically emphasized the autonomy of women, and especially the rational agency of women. How interesting then, that it isn't her autonomy which Jane appeals to here. Jane's protest that she isn't a machine is made on the grounds of her feelings. She has a *perspective—*a distinctive, emotionally infused point of view—just as Rochester assumes for himself. And this, it seems, is crucial to what it means to be respected as a person. It is the "feature" of her, to put it formally, that Rochester is supposed to "recognize." It is the feature he is being called to appropriately "take account of " in deciding how to act in relation to her.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

This notion of passionate personhood was alive in much early feminist literature, which used it to develop the concept of respect for persons. Most often this takes the form of a struggle to be understood as the particular person one is. That is, on the one hand, like most novels, early modern feminist stories draw us into a character's perspective, cashed out in the terms of emotions and feelings—hopes, fears, love, hate, and so on. On the other hand, however, women writers conjoined this typical literary aim to illustrations of the kinds of trials women face to have that perspective properly understood by others, taken seriously, or even acknowledged. The result is that *understanding* a person's perspective ends up looking like a way of *respecting* them, and in a moralized sense.

I won't pretend to be able to defend this idea fully here (Debes 2017b).28 Instead, I will only offer a few more illustrations for this alternative way of thinking about respect in order to buttress my original aim to examine the origins of our moralized concept of respect, as well as to buttress my methodological suggestion for exploring outside the traditional canon. I start with a pair of additional examples from the feminist literature, and close with some examples from the abolitionist context.

### **5. Feminist Tales**

In 1697 there appeared a mostly forgotten short story by a mostly forgotten author, Aphra Behn's *The Adventure of the Black Lady.* The story follows Bellamora, a young woman, who flees in shame to the city after becoming pregnant out of wedlock to a man of means whom she (mistakenly) fears doesn't love her. The distraught Bellamora loses her only property as soon as she arrives and seems ripe for tragedy—a lady "black" with ill repute, so it seems. But Bellamora is taken in by a clever "Land-Lady," who counsels her, helps her reclaim her lost property, reunites her with her lover, and ultimately protects the secrecy of Bellamora's pregnancy from the authorities—"the Vermin of the Parish, (I mean, the Overseers of the poor, who eat the Bread from 'em)" (Behn 1697: 11:37; Ferguson 2006). The story is an early entry into the politics of reproduction, class relations, and property rights. But it is also a subtle recasting of moral personhood. Bellamora is manifestly foolish and innocent, but for her youth not her gender, as is made clear by the juxtaposition with the clever and wise Land-Lady, who deftly turns Bellamora's fortune around and outwits the men who would try to "oversee" them both. But equally important is that Bellamora's emotional plight is looked on tenderly by the Land-Lady, who, far from condemning Bellamora, is moved by Bellamora's passionate pleas and desperation to aid her despite personal risk. The Land-Lady, and we the readers, through the narrator's eyes, are brought into Bellamora's perspective through empathy. We come to understand her—her needs, feelings, hopes, and fears. At the same time, in virtue of being taken inside the Land-Lady's plans to help Bellamora, the story subtly disposes us to regard Bellamora's feelings as *worthy* of aid and attention. In other words, the story moves us to simulate *recognition* for Bellamora, except, once again, not on account of her autonomy, but instead on account of her passionate perspective. And thus, although the story never explicitly mentions "respect," it seems that respect is precisely what we come to have for Bellamora. At least, this seems to be where Aphra Behn hopes we end up. For the story ends with a metaphorical twist when it turns out that Bellamora is "black" in the most mundane sense: she has black hair.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

In the twilight of the Enlightenment, *Frankenstein* appeared. Written by Wollstonecraft's daughter, Mary Shelley, and published in 1818, it was a tour de force critique of the past age and all its claims to "progress." On its face, the grim consequences of Victor Frankenstein's awesome power of "bestowing animation upon lifeless matter" seems to be a cautionary tale about life in a world fascinated by scientific, technological advance (Shelley 2013: 39). But its deeper and more intriguing parable is undoubtedly about the supposed moral progress of the day. Shelley repeatedly juxtaposes the "sensitive," "humane," and "sympathetic" disposition of the uncultured and unlearned creature with the dubious humanity of Dr. Frankenstein himself. In the early days after its awakening, for example, the creature marvels at the beauty of the natural world around him, famously saves a child from drowning, and falls in love with the tender interactions of a poor family whom he secretly spies upon. By contrast, Frankenstein abandons his creation almost immediately after giving it life, repeatedly expresses visceral disgust towards it (at one point describing the creature's visage as "more hideous than belongs to humanity"), and becomes increasingly impassive to the welfare of all those around him, even allowing a young woman in his employ to be falsely convicted and punished in order to hide the secret of his creation. This juxtaposition comes to a point when the creature finally confronts Frankenstein with his woeful tale of all that befell him after being abandoned. Despite listening to the creature's harrowing narrative, Frankenstein shows only flickers of compassion, and ultimately fails to understand the kind radical exclusion that goes with being condemned as unnatural and inhuman.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

In this way, Shelley's story critiques a world that, despite its various egalitarian declarations and constitutions, remained intolerant and violently oppressive. What's more, and what makes *Frankenstein* especially relevant for us, it did so in the conceptual space of respect. True, sometimes Shelley does this in a way that wanes away from the moralized notion of respect for persons as persons, as when the creature gazes wonderingly at the "love and respect" the cottagers show for their elders. But at other points the moralized concept of respect is manifest. For example, at one point the creature implores, "Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other and trample upon me alone." And later he cries, "Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind?. . . Shall I respect man when he condemns me?"

Moreover, if we step back to ask what kind of connection with others the creature wants, or what form the hoped-for attention or recognition will take, the answer is clearly a passionate one. The creature longs to have the emotional aspects of its perspective appreciated and understood, or at least noticed. In short, it wants empathy. Or, in the terminology of Shelley's day, sympathy:

Sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed similes of consolation. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone.

Most impressive of all, however, is the creature's climactic plea for Frankenstein to create for him a companion:

My vices are the children of forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I am now excluded.

The creature may have had the ostensive figure of a man, but it was genius of Shelley to leave it unnamed. For, this is the plea of the oppressed the world over. We long to be included. And included *as* the sensitive, passionate beings we are.

### **6. The Abolitionist Cause**

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

On July 4, 1791, George Buchanan delivered a speech to a group of abolitionists in Baltimore entitled *An Oration upon the Moral and Political Evil of Slavery*. The speech touched almost every argumentative angle one could take against slavery. He argued that slavery was holding back the economy of the country. He tried to spark sympathy for the suffering of slaves. He extoled their intellectual, literary, and musical capabilities. He denounced the hypocrisy of a country that could declare all men as equal, but nevertheless "riveted the fetter of slavery" upon some of them. Buchanan even warned whites that the sheer number of slaves in America made slaves "capable of ransacking the country," in which case, he implied, whites would be the justified victims of their "revenge" (Buchanan 1873: 17). But the overarching theme was shared humanity. At its opening, Buchanan reminded whites that they share a common human form with slaves—that both whites and blacks are created in the "image" of God, which "linked together" whites and blacks with an original "equality" (Buchanan 1873: 7). He repeatedly used the language of "species" and "fellow-mortals." He spoke of a single "human race." And he called out, "What, will you not consider that the Africans are men?" (Buchanan 1873: 9). It is not a particularly eloquent speech. Nor does it suggest any innovation in the concept of respect. But in the opening chapters of America, the grim truth is that black slaves were not even in the moral *space* of respect. Buchanan's speech was a start, though not the only one.

The anti-slavery lecture circuit was a source of important developments, especially as it matured through the first half of the century. Just after the US Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, the former slave Jermain Loguen helped persuade the city of Syracuse to become a refugee city. "My neighbors!" Loguen begins, addressing a mostly white assembly and using one of the "cluster" terms of human dignity we discussed earlier, "Did I think so meanly of you, I could never come to live with you?" (Loguen 2006: 8). In so saying, Loguen does not so much argue for equal respect, but *assumes* it as a premise, by asserting his common humanity and moral status with his audience. He presses this assumption through to his conclusion:

I will not live a slave, and if force is employed to reenslave me, I shall make preparation to meet the crisis as becomes a man. If you will stand by me—and I believe you will do it, for your freedom and honor are involved as well as mine it requires no microscope to see that—I say if you will stand with *us* in resistance to this measure, you will be the saviors of your country. (Loguen 2006: 10)

The switch in this passge to the inclusive "us" is brilliant and poignant. On the heels of reminding his audience that resistance to slavery is his right *as a man*, Loguen's "us" seems to assume the collective of the entire room, as if, were anyone to dissent, they would not be breaking with only blacks, but with their neighbors, and by extension, with humanity—a point Frederick Douglass reiterated with even more force two years later in his speech "What to the Slave is the Fourth of July?" Only now, Douglass made explicit what Loguen left implicit:

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Must I argue the wrongfulness of slavery? Is that a question for republicans? Is it to be settled by the rules of logic and argumentation, as a matter beset with great difficulty, involving a doubtful application of the principle of justice, hard to be understood?. . .To do so would be to make myself ridiculous and to offer an insult to your understanding. There is not a man beneath the canopy of heaven that does not know that slavery is wrong *for him*. (Douglas 2006: 22)

And true to his word, Douglass does not argue for the wrongfulness of slavery in this speech. He assumes it, in very much the same way that I assumed the truth of human dignity at the outset of this inquiry. Everything follows from there.

Of course, the wrongfulness of slavery *was* a question. Not, perhaps, for the new "Republicans" whom Douglass was addressing, nor one that we ourselves want to entertain—I certainly will not. But it was a question for many whites of the day. Thankfully, for those whites, formal argument wasn't the only alternative to the Loguen-Douglass style approach. There was also literature.

At first, it was slave narratives, published continuously from about 1760 to 1860. Most of these worked through a kind of oral tradition, in two senses. The published accounts were modeled on one another in content and shape; and they were treated like collective property to aid a larger cause. Even Frederick Douglass's well-known narrative is thought by some to have been modeled on the much earlier 1789 *Life of Olaudah Equiano* (Gates 1987). And while these narratives don't explicitly contribute to a language of respect for persons, they plainly involved the idea. Akin to the feminist literature we considered, they make available to white readers the perspective of the black slave, and show it to be permeated by sorrow and suffering. More important, in making that perspective empathically understandable, the slave's narrative was a direct vehicle to a kind of moralized respect, or so my hypothesis suggests. The anonymous, retrospective preface to the 1814 edition of *The Life of Olaudah Equiano* appreciated the point: "Being a true relation of occurrences which had taken place, and of suffering which he had endured, it produced a degree of human feeling in men's minds, to excite which the most animated addresses and the most convincing abstract reason would have labored in vain" (Gates 1987: 5).

Soon, other literary minds took the lead of these narratives, and in ways that seemed more conscientiously to shape the theoretical space of respect. Some of these, like Harriet Jacobs's *Incidents in the Life of a Slavegirl, Written by Herself*, were still autobiographical, but closer to novels in their form and style, and without the derivative structure of the oral tradition. Others were bona fide fiction. In this latter group, none was more influential in the nineteenth century than Harriet Beacher Stowe's *Uncle Tom's Cabin: Life among the Lowly.* Started as a serial story in an abolitionist periodical in 1851, *Uncle Tom's Cabin* eventually became the best-selling novel of the century. And, like the slave narratives it was inspired by, it was partly designed to marshal the empathy of white readers for the misery of slavery. As the book's subtitle suggests, Stowe wanted her readers to be able to see themselves in the place of the slave, however imperfectly, and thus to feel a sense of the fear, loss, betrayal, and heartbreak that shaped "life among the lowly." However, and crucially, the goal was not to elicit pity. The goal was to engender Christian fellowship and the recognition of shared humanity with slaves, and in particular, to see slaves as persons. In short, the novel contested the way whites understood the space of moralized respect.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

The foregoing points must be underlined, because both Stowe and the book are hardly beyond reproach. Some of Stowe's personal correspondence, for example, suggests a depressing condescension towards actual black persons who reached out to her, including Harriet Jacobs.29 And James Baldwin famously raked the novel for its "excessive and spurious" displays of emotion, but especially Stowe's willingness to put on display the violent brutality of slavery without addressing what Baldwin called "the only important question" about that violence, namely, "what it was, after all, that moved her people to such deeds."

But I'm not positioning *Uncle Tom's Cabin* here at the end of my short history of respect because the novel is an ideal paradigm. I'm positioning it here because, on the one hand, it was literally the most famous bookend to the historical timeframe I set out to explore. And, on the other hand, it develops the moralized concept of respect *by* centering passionate personhood. True, its efforts in this last respect are often exaggerated in a way that invites suspicion over, as Baldwin puts it, the "honesty" of the emotional displays of its characters. However, given the historical dominance of rationalist alternatives, and the way such rationalism was used to disenfranchise not only blacks, but women too, perhaps the lessons of Stowe's novel are subtler than Baldwin's critique suggests.

To appreciate these suggestions, consider a pivotal exchange from a pivotal chapter in *Uncle Tom's Cabin*, "Select Incident of Lawful Trade." The exchange takes place during a conversation among white passengers traveling on an Ohio riverboat. After news spreads that the boat is carrying slaves (including Tom), a white woman laments to her company the "shame" of slavery. "The most dreadful part of slavery, to my mind," she says, "is its outrages on the feelings and affections—the separating of families, for example." To this remark, another woman dissents, "We can't reason from our feelings to those of this class of persons." The first woman replies, "I know they do feel, just as keenly—even more so, perhaps as we do."

The reply is crucial. It shifts the question at hand from *what* slaves feel to a more general point about a shared *capacity* to feel—a point that in turn implies the shared humanity between whites and black slaves. This implication is affirmed when a nearby man joins the conversation in an effort to support the dissenting side with biblical authority:

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

"It's undoubtedly the intention of Providence that the African race should be servants—kept in a low condition," said a grave-looking gentleman in black, a clergyman, seated by the cabin door. "'Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be,' the scripture says."

Notice that the biblical appeal (to Genesis 9:25) doesn't aim to refute the woman's basic claim about the passionate personhood of slaves. Instead, it's meant to block the implication *from* such personhood (assuming slaves have it) *to* shared humanity. The man offers a supposedly divinely ordained metaphysical distinction of race between whites and blacks, with its own implication that this separation excuses whites from respecting slaves as persons. How interesting, then, that this racist claim isn't the last word. Stowe enters one more character to turn the tide:

A tall, slender young man, with a face expressive of great feeling and intelligence, here broke in, and repeated the words, "'All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them.' I suppose," he added, "*that* is scripture, as much as 'Cursed be Canaan.' "

Although the term "respect" doesn't appear here, Stowe obviously treats this further Christian scripture (drawn from Matthew 7:12) as an appeal to the idea that all persons deserve respect *as* persons. Thus, not only does the story describe the young man as speaking "for the cause of humanity," but also, the background context of human dignity is marked by the egalitarian force that the young man gives to this scripture. Very much like the way "neighbor" functioned in Romans 13:9, the young man assumes that black slaves are included in the extension of the term, "men." Moreover, given the rest of the context, it's not men *per se*, but rather men *as* passionate persons that's the issue. Slavery represents the radical disrespect of persons, not simply because of its totalizing rejection of autonomy or freedom, but because it attempts to ignore or exclude the stories of those under its yoke. Should there be any doubt on this point, the way Stowe closes this pivotal scene must erase it:

As the boat stopped, a black woman came running wildly up the plank, darted into the crowd, flew up to where the slave gang sat, and threw her arms round that unfortunate piece of merchandise before enumerate—"John, aged thirty," and with sobs and tears bemoaned him as her husband.

But what needs tell the story, told too oft,—every day told,—of heart-strings rent and broken,—the weak broken and torn for the profit and convenience of the strong! It needs not to be told;—every day is telling it,—telling it, too, in the ear of One who is not deaf, though he be long silent.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **Notes**

- 1. Between verb and noun the OED lists eighteen primary connotations for "respect," with dozens of sub-connotations and special phrases. Later, I point out a prominent example where its meaning pulls in different directions. The OED also speculates that part of its etymological origin is the closely related Latin *respectare* (to keep looking round or back, to wait expectant).
- 2. Appraisal respect also figures in deliberation, but in a non-essential way. As Darwall explains, "It is true that in order to indicate or express such [appraisal] respect, certain behavior from us will be appropriate. But unlike recognition respect, appraisal respect does not itself consist in that behavior or in the judgment that is appropriate. Rather, it consists in the appraisal itself " (Darwall 1977: 39).
- 3. Cole's earlier *The English Dictionary* (1676) lists only the cognate "respectful" ("giving respect").
- 4. For example, "Objections to Woman Suffrage Answered," a widely read leaflet by Henry Blackwell, listed as the fourteenth possible objection: "It would diminish respect for women." Blackwell's reply, however, makes clear that it is not the moralized respect he has in mind: "Voting is power. Power always commands respect. . .Women armed with the ballot will be stronger and more respected than ever before" (Blackwell 1896).
- 5. The first concrete English-language reflection of the moralized notion of respect appears in the 1909 revision of this same dictionary, undertaken by William Harris and F. Sturges Allen. It occurs (a bit ironically) under the fourth definition, "To consider worthy of esteem," which goes on to state, "hence, to refrain from obtruding upon or interfering with; as, to *respect* a person's privacy" (Harris and Allen 1909: 1816). The phrasing of "a" person suggests "any" or "all" persons. However, an earlier case can be found in the German language, in the *Deutsches Wörterbuch* (1854) definition of *Achtung* (respect). Today, the moralized notion of respect is clearly indicated in the (2016) *Oxford English Dictionary* under 6e of the verb entry.
- 6. This is the King James Bible translation, first published 1611. But "respect" is used as early as Coverdale's 1535 Bible to translate the same passage, as well as Romans 2:11; and as early as the 1587 Geneva Bible for Deuteronomy 16:19. Earlier examples can be found in Tyndale (1525) though not Wycliff (1395).
- 7. The terminology of a "properly basic" belief derives from Alvin Plantinga. Rawls and Dworkin are seminal examples of those who have treated the principle of equal regard this way, as I note below. The description of this principle as forming a "boundary of reasonable disagreement" is more recent (Held and Maffettone 2016).
- 8. The UN Declaration paved the way for a variety of further humanitarian activist efforts that quickened the normalization of equal respect. For example, Amnesty International's Mission Statement is literally modeled on the UN Declaration. And the global

watchdog Human Rights Watch states in its "Core Values": "Our work is guided by international human rights and humanitarian law and respect for the dignity of each human being." [https://www.hrw.org/about.](https://www.hrw.org/about)

- 9. The first decision recognized the right to legal counsel for even the poorest blacks; the second struck down the injustice of Alabama's prohibition on blacks from jury service.
- 10. The banner paraphrased Susan B. Anthony, who expressed a similar statement in two different letters she wrote to Henry Blackwell, in 1872 and 1894.
- 11. I develop these ideas at length in my manuscript draft *Rethinking Respect* (Debes, under review).
- 12. I grant that within the German tradition Kant may have played *the* decisive role in transforming the concept of respect. Hegel's exploration of respect is especially remarkable for its later influence on contemporary theories of respect, especially Axel Honneth's work on the politics of recognition (Honneth 1996; Laitinen 2017: 171–206).
- 13. Cf. Kant's *Critique of Pure Reason* B375 [3:249], B651 [3:415], B736 [3:466]. (As indexed in Martin 1967.)
- 14. A definitive reference to both Kant and his sense of respect as recognition for persons appears in the definition of *Achtung* in the nineteenth century, *Deutsches Wörterbuch* (1854).
- 15. *The Critical Review*, *or Annals of Literature*, Vol. 23 (August, 1798), 445–448. The review was of A. F. M Willich's marred and partial presentation of Kant's works in *Elements of the Critical Philosophy*.
- 16. A few exceptions exist, such as Coleridge's musings on Kant, or the entry on "Philosophy" in John Wilkes's 1825 *Encyclopaedia Londinensis*, which was essentially a summary and partial defense of Kant's system of philosophy.
- 17. In a translator's note to the text, Semple mentions an earlier anonymous translation, which appeared under the title *Kant's Essays* in 1799. But according to Semple, these essays, "rendered by a foreigner" (probably John Richardson), were very hard to obtain. The next closest serious editions after Semple include Abbot (in 1895) and Paton (in 1947).
- 18. See *The Contemporary Review* (London: Strahan & Co., 1869): 452. Notably, by this point, the author testifies to the reemerging influence of Kant in anglophone circles, stating, "some real knowledge of Kant is indispensable in order to comprehension [sic] of the learned thought of our time."
- 19. The mention of Marx might make one wonder whether Kant could have influenced thinking about respect indirectly, through Marxist writing. Again, no. Marxism did exert substantive influence on first-wave feminist thought, but not until *c.*1900. Thus, Friedrich Engels's *Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State—*a kind of locus classicus for Marxist feminism—didn't appear until 1884, and wasn't translated into English until 1902.
- 20. Later Lucy Day Sessions. *A Plea for the Oppressed* was delivered as a commencement speech to Oberlin College, after Lucy Stanton became the first African American to earn a four-year college degree in the United States.
- 21. For example, in a letter to the editor of the *National Anti-Slavery Standard* in 1865, after black men had won the right to vote, Stanton asked "whether we had better stand aside and see 'Sambo' walk into the kingdom first." In the same letter, she suggested

black women were better off as actual slaves without the vote, "In fact, it is better to be the slave of an educated white man, than of a degraded, ignorant black one" (Stanton 1997: 564).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

- 22. I borrow the phrase "untidy origins" from Faye Dudden (Dudden 2016).
- 23. See my edited collection, *Dignity: A History* (Debes 2017a), especially the introduction and chapters 6–10.
- 24. More exactly, the opening paragraph announces Locke's rebuttal of Roger Filmer's *Patriarcha* published in 1680.
- 25. For example, De Gournay argues that in those whose nature is one and the same, "one must conclude that their actions are also the same, and that their esteem and praise are therefore equal when their works are equal" (De Gournay 2013: 66; Jordan 1983: 181–201). I am sure there were exceptions to what I am calling the "dominant" line, and very old ones too. Christine de Pizan's 1405 *Le Livre de la Cité des Dames*, for example, strikes me as a possibility.
- 26. Mill even called himself a "socialist," albeit with some qualifications, in his autobiography.
- 27. See also Boralevi 1984. To be clear: early socialism was not immune to moments of regression. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, for example, another prominent early British socialist, opposed woman's suffrage. In fact, he was both a sexist and an anti-Semite (Proudhon 1960).
- 28. I develop the idea even further in my draft monograph *Rethinking Respect* (Debes, under review).
- 29. Jacobs then asked Cornelia Willis to propose to Stowe that Jacobs's daughter Louisa accompany her to England and tell Jacob's story to Stowe during the journey. In reply, Stowe forwarded the story outline to Willis and declined to let Louisa join her, citing the possibility of Louisa being spoiled by too much sympathy shown to her in England (Yellin 2004: 119–121; Jacobs 2000: xxi).

### **References**

- Abbot, Lynn and Seroff, Doug, 2017. *The Original Blues: The Emergence of the Blues in African American Vaudeville*, Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi.
- Adelung, Johann Christoph, 1793. *Grammatisch-kritisches Wörterbuch der hochdeutschen Mundart*, Vol. 1, Leipzig: J. G. I. Breitkopf und Comp.
- Behn, Aphra, 1697. *The Adventure of the Black Lady* (eBooks@Adelaide: last updated December 29, 2015).
- Bernasconi, Robert and Mann, Anika, 2005. "The Contradictions of Racism: Locke, Slavery, and the Two Treatises." In: *Race and Racism in Modern Philosophy*, ed. Andrew Valls, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Blackwell, Henry, 1896. "Objections to Woman Suffrage Answered." *Woman's Journal* 5 (2).
- Boralevi, Lea, 1984. *Bentham and the Oppressed*, Berlin: de Gruyter.

Brontë, Charlotte, 2001. *Jane Eyre*, ed. R. J. Dunn, New York: W. W. Norton.

- Buchanan, George, 1873. "Oration upon the Moral and Political Evil of Slavery." In: *Anti-Slavery Opinions before the Year 1800* by William Poole, Cincinnati, OH: Robert Clarke & Co.
**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

- Burns, J. H., 2009. "Scottish Kantians." *The Journal of Scottish Philosophy* 7 (2): 115–131.
- Butler, Joseph, 1983. *Five Sermons*, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Cole, Elisha, 1676. *The English Dictionary*, London: S. Collins.
- *The Contemporary Review*, 1869, London: Strahan & Co.
- Cooper, Anna, 2017. *A Voice from the South: By a Black Woman of the* South, Mineola, NY: Dover Press.
- Copleston, Frederick, 1966. *A History of Philosophy*, Vol. 8, Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press.

Darwall, Stephen, 1977. "Two Kinds of Respect." *Ethics* 88 (1): 36–49.

- Debes, Remy (ed.), 2017a. *Dignity: A History*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Debes, Remy, 2017b. "Understanding Persons and the Problem of Power." In: *Making Sense of the World: New Essays in the Philosophy of Understanding*, ed. Stephen Grimm, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Debes, Remy (under review). *Rethinking Respect*.
- De Gournay, Marie Le Jars, 2013. "A la Ryene, l'Égalité des Hommes et des Femmes." In: *The Equality of the Sexes: Three Feminist Texts of the Seventeenth Century*, ed. and trans. Desmond Clarke, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Douglas, Frederick, 2006. "What to the Slave, is the Fourth of July?" in *Great Speeches by African Americans*, ed. James Daley, Minneola, NY: Dover Publications.
- Draper, Hal, 2013. "The Myth of Mary Wollstonecraft." In: *Women and Class: Towards a Socialist Feminism*, ed. E. Haberkern, Almeda, CA: Center for Socialist History.
- DuBois, Ellen (ed.), 1992. *The Elizabeth Cady Stanton-Susan B. Anthony Reader*, Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press.
- Dudden, Faye, 2016. "Women's Rights, Abolitionism, and Reform in Antebellum and Gilded Age America" (DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.20).
- Ferguson, Margaret, 2006. "Conning the 'Overseers': Women's Illicit Work in Behn's 'The Adventure of the Black Lady.'" *Early Modern Culture: An Electronic Seminar* 5.
- Gates, Henry Louis (ed.), 1987. "Introduction." In: *The Classic Slave Narratives*, New York: Mentor Press.
- Harper, Ida, 1898. *The Life and Work of Susan B. Anthony*, Vol. 1, Indianapolis, IN and Kansas City: Bown-Merril Co.
- Harris, William and Sturges Allen, F. 1909. *Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language, Based on the International Dictionary of 1890 and 1900*, Springfield, OR: G. & C. Merriam Co.
- Held, David and Maffettone, Pietro (eds.). 2016. *Global Political Theory*, Cambridge: Polity Press.
- Honneth, Alex, 1996. *The Struggle for Recognition: The Moral Grammar of Social Conflicts*, trans. Joel Anderson, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

- Jacobs, Harriet, 2000. *Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl: Written by Herself,* Cambridge: Penguin Classics.
- Jordan, Constance, 1983. "Feminism and the Humanists: The Case of Sir Thomas Elyot's Defence of Good Women." *Renaissance Quarterly* 36 (2): 181–201.
- Kant, Immanuel, 1996. *Practical Philosophy*, ed. Mary Gregor, Cambridge University Press.
- Laitinen, Arto, 2017. "Hegel and Respect for Persons." In: *The Roots of Respect: A Historic-Philosophical Itinerary*, ed. Giovanni Giorini and Elena Irrera, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
- Locke, John, 1988. *Two Treatises of Government*, ed. Peter Laslett, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Loguen, Jermain, 2006. "I am a Fugitive Slave." In *Great Speeches by African Americans*, ed. James Daley, Minneola, NY: Dover Publications.
- Marshall, Justice Thurgood, 1987. "Reflections on the Bicentennial of the United States Constitution." *Harvard Law Review* 101: 1.
- Martin, Gottfried, 1967. *Sachindex zu Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft*, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
- Micheli, Giuseppe, 2005. "The Early Reception of Kant's Thought in England 1785–1805." In: *Kant and His Influence*, ed. George MacDonald Ross and Tony McWalter, London: Continuum International.
- Mill, John Stuart, 1981. *Autobiography and Literary Essays*, ed. John Robson and Jack Stillinger, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Mill, John Stuart, 2002. "The Subjection of Women." In: *The Basic Writings of John Stuart Mill*, ed. Dale Miller, New York: Random House.
- *Oxford English Dictionary*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.
- Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph, 1960. "Diary Entry, December 26, 1847." In: *Carnets de P. J. Proudhon*, Paris: M. Rivière.
- Rapier, James, 2006. "The Civil Rights Bill [1875]." In: *Great Speeches by African Americans*, ed. James Daley, Mineola, NY: Dover Press.
- Saint-Simon, Henri, 1817. *L'Industrie*, Paris: Au Bureau de l'Adminstration.
- Shelley, Mary, 2013. *Frankenstein*, San Diego: Canterbury Classics.
- Smith, Adam, 1982. *The Theory of Moral* Sentiments, Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund.
- Stanton, Cady, 1997. *The Selected Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony* Vol. 1, ed. Ann Gordon, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Stanton, Lucy, 1850. "A Plea for the Oppressed." *Evangelist*, December: 208.
- Wilkes, John, 1825. *Encyclopaedia Londinensis*, vol. 20, London: J. Adlard.
- Wollstonecraft, Mary, 1792. *A Vindication of the Rights of Woman with Strictures on Political and Moral Subjects*, London: J. Johnson.
- Wollstonecraft, Mary, 1795. *An Historical and Moral View of the Origin and Progress of the French Revolution*, London: J. Johnson in St. Paul's Churchyard.
- Yellin, Jean Fagan, 2004. *Harriet Jacobs: A Life*, New York: Basic Civitas Books.