### [Introduction](#page-7-0) *Richard Dean and Oliver Sensen*

<span id="page-13-0"></span>**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Respect plays a prominent role in both everyday pre-philosophical moral thinking and in contemporary moral philosophy.

Ordinary moral discussion is often framed in terms of demands for respect or complaints about being disrespected. A recognition of the status a person has due to her personhood, accomplishments, or position, as well as concerns about people being "used" or undervalued, all draw on a broader recognition of the importance of respect. Furthermore, arguments for expanding the sphere of moral concern to include non-human animals, nature, or artistic creations are often presented in terms of respect.

Respect also is a fundamental concept in recent moral philosophy. It is a widely held view that there is a characteristic typical of competent human adults, such as autonomy, rationality, or the capacity for morality, that grounds a requirement to respect them. This respect for persons is often thought to be the basis for a variety of more particular duties, or even the basis of all duties. This is especially the case in practical ethics, when, for instance, debates in bioethics appeal to a requirement of respect for the autonomy of patients. And respect is invoked as often in philosophy as it is in everyday arguments, when it comes to expanding the scope of morality beyond competent, adult human beings.

Yet basic questions about the concept and role of respect have received less attention than might be expected, given the centrality of respect in moral discourse.

The aim of this volume is to further the research on this crucial moral concept of respect. The goal is not to offer a comprehensive, encyclopedic handbook that covers all aspects of the topic, nor is the focus of the book mainly historical. Rather, the aim is to give some leading experts in the field, as well as some younger thinkers with fresh approaches, a chance to give their thoughts, and to point the research on respect in new directions. There is no expectation that the authors will all arrive at any consensus in the end, but the hope is that the arguments offered for different views will spark further exploration of the topic of respect.

Of course, some influential ideas about respect loom large in many of the essays (Stephen Darwall's distinction between recognition respect and appraisal respect is a conspicuous example), and Immanuel Kant undeniably casts a long shadow over the volume. But it is worth saying explicitly that the essays do not all presuppose a shared starting point about the importance of respect, or what respect is, and still less do they assume the infallibility of the views on respect of any particular philosopher, even Kant. The discussions of respect in this book include many diverging ideas, and significant doses of various types of skepticism.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

The volume will be divided into three parts, following an introductory historical essay. The three parts are not presumed to encompass all possible areas of interest regarding respect, but just comprise a rough grouping of essays by theme.

Part I deals roughly with the question of what respect is, its nature and its basis. Part II deals with questions about the proper role of respect in moral theory. Does respect serve as a unique foundation for morality or is it one moral concern among many? What exactly ought to be respected, and which different types of respect are appropriate and morally significant? Part III deals with more practical issues of applying requirements of respect.

The short descriptions below capture the main issues dealt with in each chapter, but of course do not lay out the authors' arguments in detail.

Chapter 1. Remy Debes provides a historical background for the prominent role that respect plays in current moral discussion. But, true to the spirit of this volume as philosophical rather than encyclopedic, Debes does not just describe texts and list dates. Instead, he raises doubts about the standard story about the rising influence of the idea of respect for persons, that it comes mainly and directly from Immanuel Kant. Debes offers evidence that by the time Kant's writings gained influence in the English-speaking world, the movement toward the importance of respect for all persons already was well underway, albeit often using terminology other than "respect." This movement grew partly among moral and political philosophers, and political activists, but Debes emphasizes that it also arose in underappreciated literary writing, often written by women and men of color.

### **Part I. On What Respect Is**

Chapter 2. Philip Pettit develops an account of the fundamental nature and basis of respect. Pettit's "conversive" theory of respect draws on the fact that our unique command of language provides us with a "special means of mutual influence," making us accessible to each other's understanding. Our conversive nature is necessarily accompanied by some shared standards for what ought to count as reasons for believing something, and for what one ought to desire or intend. To act respectfully is to act from a robust commitment to treat you as a conversive partner, to present you with reasons for forming beliefs and intentions, rather than just trying to elicit these through any means that are causally effective.

Chapter 3. Gerald Gaus argues that respect for persons is not an independent ground for requiring that social morality must be publicly justified. Instead, respect is built into the structure of social morality, because social morality involves recognizing one another as sources of a moral summons to follow rules. So mutual respect for persons is a social achievement, not a requirement underlying morality. The authority of rules of social morality derives from this structural nature of social morality. But because one may face a gap between one's individual moral reasoning and social morality, no particular rule of social morality, including rules about whether coercion is justified, necessarily overrides one's own moral conclusions.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Chapter 4. Uriah Kriegel and Mark Timmons apply to the feeling of respect an approach that has become common in understanding other mental phenomena, such as emotions. They distinguish the functional role of respect in moral philosophy (for instance, the types of treatment that respect leads to), which is described third-personally, from the phenomenological account of what it feels like to experience respect, which is described first-personally. Since discussions of respect in analytic philosophy have focused almost entirely on its third-person functional role, shifting our attention to the phenomenological experience of respect may provide valuable new insights.

Chapter 5. Oliver Sensen analyses what, more concretely, one must do to respect someone. In order to find a universal criterion of respect, Sensen first distinguishes different usages of "respect," such as "not using someone as a mere means," "gaining another's consent." Sensen argues that—while these usages are of central importance in our everyday life—they are not the universal respect that we always owe to all others. Rather, he argues, universal respect consists in not exalting oneself above others, which itself consists in not breaking rules that we regard as objectively necessary. The discovery of these necessary rules is largely an empirical matter that involves universal human needs, cultural norms, and giving others a voice in how they are treated. If one does not make an exception to these rules, one's behavior is respectful toward all others.

### **Part II. Respect in Moral Theory**

Chapter 6. Carla Bagnoli argues that Kant's conception of respect as a moral feeling is crucial to any constructivist theory of practical reason because it provides the only satisfactory account of how moral commands carry subjective authority—how they motivate moral agents. Without positing a feeling of respect, a constructivist theory can explain objective reasons for action, but not why they are subjectively binding. In particular, a feeling of respect plays this role of accounting for subjective authority better than the "reflective endorsement" of moral ends or actions that has been proposed by prominent Kantian constructivists.

Chapter 7. Richard Dean examines the popular strategy of developing a system of moral duties based on respect for some capacity possessed by all persons. Dean argues that not only is there a deep ambiguity in the concept of a "capacity," as either a mere potential or as a developed and stable ability or characteristic, but that several prominent moral theories based on respect for a capacity trade problematically on this ambiguity. Dean suggests that the prevalence of this mistake is evidence that such a strategy for developing moral theories is not viable.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Chapter 8. Thomas E. Hill, Jr. breaks with two conventional approaches in moral philosophy. Hill eschews the recent tendency to focus either on duties or on virtues, and instead emphasizes the importance of moral attitudes. And Hill specifically steps outside the usual framework of Kantian ethics by developing and defending the importance of a moral attitude besides respect and beneficence, namely the attitude of appreciation. The attitude of appreciation is especially important in personal relationships, although it includes recognizing and responding positively to the distinctive features possessed by many sorts of things, not just persons.

Chapter 9. Christine Korsgaard reexamines her earlier positions on the value of humanity, and the treatment and respect that befit an end in itself. She articulates a version of these ideas in which one can see non-human animals as ends in themselves. Korsgaard first points out that we can value our own moral nature without thinking that beings without such a nature are of lesser value, just as one can value one's identity as a parent without thinking less of non-parents. She then distinguishes different ways of understanding what is involved in valuing humanity or rational nature, and proposes that one aspect of valuing a being as an end in itself is thinking that the being's good matters and is worthy of consideration. This sense of being an end in oneself can apply to non-human animals, even if they do not share the rationality of typical human beings.

Chapter 10. Stephen Darwall returns to a recurring theme in his work, addressing the problem of how respect for persons as such is compatible with special respect for people with good moral character. Darwall draws on Kant's texts, especially the passage from *The Critique of Practical Reason* about a "humble common man" of upright character, to develop a rich account of various types of respect, supplementing his now-familiar distinction between recognition and appraisal respect with finer distinctions like "social respect" and "honor."

### **Part III. Applications of Respect**

Chapter 11. Robin Dillon reconsiders the question of whether arrogance is compatible with self-respect. Dillon's previous position on the issue was that arrogance involves a failure to recognize the true source of one's own value, as a rational being with the status to demand equal respect. So arrogance and self-respect are antithetical. In this chapter, Dillon revises her position, taking into account differences in power in societies. For people who are oppressed, arrogance (claiming more than society thinks is appropriate) may be compatible with, or even necessary for, self-respect. Neither people within a society, nor we as observers, can claim an objective perspective in adjudicating the issue of whether these claims are warranted, or excessive. Furthermore, it may be objectively true that, in some circumstances, arrogance is a necessary tool for overcoming oppression.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Chapter 12. Serene Khader argues against the widespread view that oppressed people have a self-regarding obligation to resist complying with oppressive norms, in order to preserve their self-respect. Khader notes that the cost of noncompliance is often underestimated. Flouting oppressive norms often poses substantial threats to an agent's welfare and even her self-respect, and compliance may express self-respect, by affirming a commitment to the importance of her own projects and to gaining the means to pursue them. Khader offers an alternative way of maintaining self-respect in the face of oppression, namely to cultivate knowledge of the oppressive situation faced by oneself and one's group, and to develop a normative perspective that recognizes and seeks to rectify injustices.

Chapter 13. Samuel Kerstein points out that although respect is a commonly deployed concept in bioethics, requirements of respect usually amount to respect for autonomy, or for giving proper weight to the choices made by competent persons. Kerstein argues that increased emphasis on another sense of respect, respect for the worth of persons, will greatly enrich discussions in several areas of bioethics, including physician-assisted dying, distribution of medical resources, and ethical considerations regarding procreation.

Chapter 14. Adam Cureton points out that the intuitively plausible claim that it is disrespectful to treat mentally competent adults as if they were children gives rise to a puzzle, within a Kantian framework. It seems possible to fulfill basic Kantian duties of respect toward adults with disabilities, by respecting their basic rights, for example, and recognizing their intrinsic worth, while still treating them like children. So how is it disrespectful to offer unwanted paternalistic assistance to a disabled person, or to speak to her condescendingly, if one is otherwise treating her as an end in herself? Cureton points out that Kant not only describes duties of respect toward rational beings in general, but also suggests that specific forms of respectful treatment may be appropriate for particular people because of their particular situation or station. Cureton proposes that treating disabled adults like children typically involves miscategorizing their "station" of being competent adult decision makers.

Chapter 15. Lucia Schwarz urges a reconsideration of the implications of species egalitarianism, which is an essential element of the position in environmental ethics that Paul Taylor calls "respect for nature." Species egalitarianism's claim that every living thing has equal inherent worth appears to lead to counterintuitive conclusions, such as that killing a human being is no worse than killing a dandelion. Species egalitarians have generally responded by explaining that species egalitarianism is compatible with recognizing moral differences between killing different types of living things, and that some killing is morally permissible. Schwarz raises doubts about whether this deflationary defensive strategy is philosophically justified, and suggests that taking seriously the supposedly repugnant implications of species egalitarianism may have a salutary effect on the overall debate.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Taken together, we hope that this loose collection of innovative essays on respect will encourage further research on this central topic in moral philosophy.