### <span id="page-175-0"></span>**[Beyond Respect and Beneficence](#page-7-0)**

An Ideal of Appreciation

*Thomas E. Hill, Jr.*

What are the attitudes that we should strive to maintain in friendships, families, and other close personal relationships? Everyone seems to agree that ideally friends, family members, those in other close personal relationships care for each other's welfare and not simply for the benefits that they expect to receive in return. Many of us would add the important qualification that they should also respect each other. They should respect each other as friends, parents, sons, daughters, partners, etc., but at least respect each other as fellow human beings. These two ideal orienting attitudes, respect and concern for others' welfare, have been repeatedly highlighted in contemporary as well as historical discussions of personal relationships (Kant 1996: 198–216 [6:448–471]; Dillon 1992). This is a welcome trend, in my view, but I suggest that a fuller discussion of ideal moral attitudes in close personal relationships should also highlight and emphasize the importance of a further ideal moral attitude that I call "appreciation." The three attitudes—respect, beneficence, and appreciation—are distinct and can at times be in tension with one another, especially in non-ideal circumstances, but in good relationships we try to achieve a balance with appropriate priorities among them. They are among the most important orienting attitudes that we should strive to maintain and honor in practice, but they are not fully determinate values that always tell us specifically what to do. Arguably, maintaining these attitudes especially towards friends, family members, and others in close personal relationships is not simply an expression of affection-based partiality but is an appropriately targeted application of a proper regard for humanity in all persons.

These are the main themes that I shall try to develop here.1 To preview, my plan is this: (section 1) I explain briefly what the main questions are, why they matter, and how I think moral theorists should investigate such questions. Here I explain more specifically why I focus on *ideal moral attitudes* in close personal relationships and how this relates to the more common debates about what is *right* and what is *wrong* to do. Then, in the next three sections, I summarize my understanding of the three basic orienting attitudes that are especially important in close personal relationships. To begin (section 2), I give a brief account of beneficence or "caring" as I understand it here. Next (section 3), I describe several ideas of *respect* for persons, distinguishing respecting persons as human beings, respecting persons for their offices or social positions, and respecting particular individuals for their merits and accomplishments. Then (section 4), I discuss an idea of *appreciation* that is distinct from both *respect* and *beneficent caring* for another's happiness and well-being. In ideal friendships one not only respects and cares for the friend but appreciates good things about the friend and in the friend's life. Appreciation, I suggest, is not the same as gratitude, though to be grateful is in part to appreciate the evident good will of another person, for example, in their efforts to benefit or please one. In conclusion (section 5), I call attention to several merits of supplementing standard accounts by including appreciation as an ideal.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **1. Investigating Ideals of Moral Attitude: Aims and Methods**

Ethical theories are often divided into those that focus on primarily *right and wrong action* and those that focus on primarily *virtues and vices* of character. Consequentialists and Kantians are typically cited as representatives of the first group, and Aristotelians as representing the second. But, of course, the moral phenomena available for philosophers to study are many and diverse, and they are related in complex ways that should be reflected in any moral theory. My questions are about moral *ideals* and *attitudes*, which are two under-studied topics that do not fall neatly into contemporary dichotomies.

Moral ideals are ideas about what is good to aspire for, to admire, and to hope for. Failures to live up to ideals or to achieve ideal outcomes are not necessarily wrong or immoral, or vicious, though such failures typically reveal moral flaws, deficiencies, or at least something regrettable about a person. Falling short of a moral ideal may not be blameworthy but it is not the sort of thing to be proud of. We have ideals regarding how we act, feel, think, and want, about we what hope to achieve, and how we relate to society and to those closest to us. We often think of ideal attitudes and conduct as what would be morally best in a more perfect world where everyone is cooperative and lives by the same moral norms and values, but this is not always what is morally best—or "ideal"—to do, think, and feel in the real world where there are free-riders, criminals, and oppressors. My focus now is on moral ideals of attitude in this real world but in conditions that are reasonably just and secure, keeping in mind that in more corrupt and dangerous conditions exceptions may be justified.

To have an attitude, I assume, is to have a complex set of dispositions to *act*, *feel*, and *think* in certain ways in response to various circumstances. Some attitudes are morally good, some are bad, and many are morally neutral or irrelevant. For example, we count compassion and respect for others, proper pride, and due

humility as generally good, whereas we regard vindictive hatred and dismissive contempt for others, servility, and conceit as generally bad. Favoring a particular sports team, disliking certain foods, and wishing to avoid crowds are attitudes commonly thought to be in themselves neutral or mostly irrelevant to moral concerns. Attitudes may be self-consciously principled or picked up and adopted with little thought, but they are often "judgment-sensitive" in Scanlon's sense (Scanlon 2000). Within limits we can adopt and maintain our attitudes for reasons, good and bad, and we can with varying degrees of success strive to develop a set of good moral attitudes that approximates our ideals. Human nature, our individual genetic make-up, and cultural forces pose (mostly unknown) limits to how much is possible for each of us, but in moral philosophy we should think constructively about which attitudes would be morally admirable and good, even best, to have if we strive successfully. This requires thinking about the kinds of *acts* that are morally commendable and the general *policies* and *intentions* to act that are good to adopt, but to have a good attitude we also need to be disposed to have appropriate *thoughts* and *feelings*. For example, if a nephew does a special favor for his rich and generous uncle while feeling nothing but disdain for him and constantly thinking "He had better reward me for this!" then the nephew's attitude seems far from ideal even if he did a good deed.2 The feelings and thoughts we have when we act are not something we can consciously control or change *at will*, but developing the dispositions to feel and think in ways appropriate to the context is at least partly up to us. The question for moral theory, then, is: what attitudes should we adopt and maintain *insofar as we can*?

Good moral *attitudes* are dispositions to act well and have feelings and thoughts that are appropriate to the circumstances we encounter, but so are moral *virtues*. So, what is the difference? Since ancient times virtues have often been taken to be broadly applicable, unified, and relatively *stable* traits of character that, once achieved, serve over a lifetime, but good attitudes can be more narrowly focused, less unified, and more readily modified in response to reasons. Virtues may be lost once acquired, but attitudes can change even more readily. This contrast is significant because, as some psychological research is said to show, human beings may rarely, if ever, achieve comprehensive, unified, and stable dispositions in the way that classical virtue theory requires (Doris 2002). We may, for example, show courage and kindness in routine circumstances but not when confronted with particular unanticipated cues. These objections to virtue theory derived from psychology have been challenged and much discussed, but, in any case, one advantage of focusing first on moral attitudes is that even if broadly focused, unified, and stable virtues are unattainable, we can still have some success in adopting and maintaining good moral attitudes with regard to specific sorts of situation. Presumably, too, any plausible account of the virtues will include an account of the sort of attitudes that we should aspire to develop.

The attempt to identify ideal moral attitudes belongs, at least initially, to normative ethical theory, which in my view begins with considered judgments about more or less realistic examples and aims to find what Rawls called "reflective equilibrium" (Rawls 1999: 20). Many of our initial judgments turn out to be rooted in ignorance and prejudice and need to be adjusted or rejected. Even when we conscientiously try to learn the relevant facts and to avoid bias, our judgments in one case may have implications that conflict with our judgments in other cases, and so we need to find ways to reconcile them in the search for a more consistent, coherent, and comprehensive set of principles and ideals. This aim of normative ethical theory is itself an ideal towards which we can make progress, though it is never fully attainable, and it leaves open further questions that belong to metaethics and practical ("applied") ethics.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **2. Beneficent Concern for Others' Happiness**

The ideal most commonly commended is a persistent and effective readiness to promote the happiness of others beyond the minimum that may be morally required of everyone.3 It is generally agreed that we have *duties* of mutual aid to help others in distress when we can at little cost to ourselves, and perhaps most would agree that in times of crisis we have duties to protect or rescue children and others most vulnerable to life-threatening forces. In general, it is wrong and vicious to let oneself be utterly indifferent to others' welfare. We may not agree entirely on exactly how to specify the moral duties of beneficence and mutual aid, but some minimum requirements of this sort are rarely disputed. But, as indicated, my primary concern here is with ideals, not strict duties, and so I want to focus on beneficent attitudes that are good to have even if they are not strictly required of everyone. This includes, I think, a readiness to do special *favors*, to offer assistance to others with their optional projects, and to exert *extraordinary effort* to serve charities that try to meet basic needs. The ideal attitude here is not, of course, to promote the good of others reluctantly, cheerlessly, or for ulterior motives but rather in a good-spirited way variously called generous, kind, benevolent, and the like. We tend to admire people who have this sort of attitude and act on it appropriately, but few would say, on reflection, that for everyone helping others is a good thing to do, and *the more the better* (Wolf 1982). There are other commendable ideals and normally we have an area of optional personal choices to pursue our own projects without being deemed either immoral or morally deficient. Efforts to make others happy can be excessive, off-putting, and even offensive. How much charitable effort is required, how much is optional, and how much is good to do beyond duty depend on context, and no bright lines can be drawn here even though extremes of what is deficient and what is beyond duty are easily recognized. For example, the character Scrooge in Charles Dicken's *A Christmas Carol* before conversion is a paradigm of vicious indifference to the happiness of others; Albert Schweitzer and Mother Theresa are often cited as commendable examples of people who sacrificed for the good of others more than required; and most people, I expect, fall between these, ready to be helpful to some extent but committed to projects of their own, not maximally beneficent but also not viciously indifferent to the welfare of others. Some of these less beneficent people may be pursuing other commendable ideals, but some may be resting content with doing what is strictly required but otherwise choosing to pursue projects of their own.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

A maximally beneficent person, as I understand this, would be committed and ready to promote others' happiness as much as he or she permissibly can, but it would be mistaken or at least misleading to say that this is "ideally beneficent" because that might suggest that being maximally beneficent is what everyone should strive for rather than "*a* good" and "*an* ideal" (not the only one) that would be good to choose. There are many ideals that one could strive to fulfill but it would be impossible to seriously undertake to fulfill them all to the greatest extent permissible (Strawson 1961). One is commendable for fulfilling them but not necessarily to be disparaged (e.g., with "She is less beneficent than she *should* be!") for not striving to fulfill the ideal so long as she is beneficent to a degree beyond vicious indifference and sufficient to meet the basic moral requirements. Most obviously, if a person pursues another commendable ideal, such as excellence in art or science, to the highest degree compatible with fulfilling basic duties, that person cannot also realistically strive to fulfill the ideal of beneficence to the highest degree. More generally, we should not assume that one is to be disparaged or treated as deficient from a moral point of view if one chooses not to pursue any ideals to the maximal extent permissible. That such pursuits are ideal, in my view, means that they are optional at least in the sense that one is not blameworthy, or morally deficient, or subject to criticism by others if one chooses not to strive towards fulfilling any such ideal to the greatest extent compatible with basic duties.

Philosophers have given different accounts of happiness or well-being, which is what the ideally beneficent person aims to promote in others. Aristotle saw the goal as human thriving in excellent activities as guided by practical wisdom in many dimensions; Epicurus viewed it as pleasure that he understood primarily as the absence of pain; Epictetus's ideal was to free oneself from desires and attachment to things that only appear to be good; Jeremy Bentham regarded it as a balance of pleasurable over painful sensations: and J. S. Mill argued that some pleasures are of higher quality and so contribute more to a happy life (Aristotle 1999; Epicurus 1994; Epictetus 1983; Bentham 2003; Mill 2001). Bishop Butler conceived of happiness as the satisfaction of our first-order intrinsic desires ("particular passions") of many different kinds, and he observed that these are not typically desires *for* pleasure even if we often find it pleasant to achieve the objects of our desires (Butler 1983). Immanuel Kant at times suggests that perfect happiness would be achieving all one's desire-based ends over time, but he also writes of happiness as including a sense of lasting contentment with one's life (Kant 2002: 200 [4:399]). Contemporary theorists distinguish subjective accounts that make happiness dependent on agents' preferences and feelings and "objective list" accounts that take happiness to be having a cluster of good things, such as health, companionship, achievements, etc. (Crisp 2017). For present purposes it should not be necessary to decide among these different accounts. My aim here is to contrast ideals of *beneficent concern for others' happiness* with ideals of *respect* and *appreciation*, and the contrast can be made, I think, with most of these various conceptions of happiness.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **3. Respect**

In general to respect something is to see it as something that one should acknowledge as significant in shaping one's conduct, giving one reason especially to stand back and limit how one treats it.4 Ideally respect also includes dispositions to acknowledge positively the worth or status of what is respected, but it is not in general a requirement to produce, promote, or improve something. A feeling of respect can be like a justified warning that there are legitimate grounds to restrict how one behaves towards something and thinks about it.5 We respect the laws, for example, that we think and feel we have good reason to obey. When we respect an expert authority on a scientific question, we count his or her judgment as giving us reason to believe and act on that judgment. Similarly, to respect a person seems to imply acknowledging that we have reason to limit our behavior, feelings, and thoughts regarding the person in some ways. If so, a general moral principle of respect for persons would imply that we should acknowledge moral reasons to restrict how we act, think, and feel about persons, and these moral reasons may be characterized differently from different moral perspectives. Kantians, for example, hold that basic respect for persons is respect for a moral law that counts humanity in each person as an end in itself. In Kantian ethics *humanity in a person* is a person's "rational nature" (Kant 2002: 227–233 [4:426–431]). This sometimes has been narrowly interpreted as just "the capacity to set ends," but it can also be reasonably be construed more broadly to include other higher-order capacities of mind and spirit that are commonly attributed to human nature—for example, capacities of understanding, reasoning, creative imagination, and prudential and moral self-governance. Consequentialists typically make happiness or well-being their ultimate aim, treating benefits and harms to persons or all sentient beings as the final reasons that must be respected, but they may support a limiting respect for persons as a derivative and conditional principle. For them whether it would be justified and ideal to treat a person with respect depends on what the effects would be, and this varies with the circumstances, whereas Kantians tend to treat the basic respect for each person as an invariable priority. Both Kantians and consequentialists acknowledge that societies have developed more specific legal, social, and cultural norms of interpersonal respect that are supported by their foundational principles6 but may be subject to exceptions.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Philosophers have distinguished different kinds of respect for persons. Stephen Darwall, for example, distinguishes what he calls *recognition respect* and *appraisal respect* (Darwall 1977). The first is a recognition and appropriate response to a person's status or office, not implying a positive judgment (appraisal) about how well the person has performed in that position. The status could be, for example, being a parent, a judge, a coach, or an elected leader, but significantly it could also be the status everyone has as a human being (in a normative sense). Kantians, and others, say that morality requires us to have a basic respect for every human being, but social norms often require that we also show a special respect for others according to their place in a social hierarchy. Sometimes these demands for respect are morally justified, but often they are questionable or deplorable aspects of unjust social hierarchies. For example, an "honor culture" may demand that members of a ruling class must duel in response to serious insults and that peasants be ready to prostrate themselves before monarchs and persons of nobility (Darwall 2015).

Unlike recognition respect, appraisal respect implies a judgment of merit. For example, we may have respect for Federer as a great tennis player, for Rene Fleming as a gifted and accomplished singer, and for our best colleagues as smart and effective teachers. More broadly, we may say that we respect someone as a person (in the appraisal sense) when we are confident that the person has integrity or is overall a morally good person. Appraisal respect can and must be earned, and so we should respect in this sense only those who are worthy of high regard and due deference because of their special merits. Sometimes when legitimate office-holders have little or no merit and so do not deserve appraisal respect, others may still respect them as persons who, for better or worse, hold an office (such as the US presidency) considered worthy of recognition respect. From a moral point of view, many of us believe, people who do terrible, even evil, things do deserve condemnation and punishment rather than appraisal respect, but we should nevertheless afford them basic recognition respect as human beings. Here *being human* is to be understood as an office, position, or status of a special kind, with global scope.

My focus here will be primarily on recognition respect for persons as human beings, especially as seen from a broadly Kantian perspective. Respect of this kind is a constraint on what we may do in our efforts to promote someone's happiness. In good friendships, as Kant suggests, love pulls us closer together and respect holds us back to some extent, leaving the friend some privacy and space to pursue happiness in her own way (Kant 1996: 215–218 [6:469–474]). Respect is distinct from both affectionate love and practical love. Affectionate love consists of feelings for others, such as wanting to be with them, to share their joys, and know them intimately. Practical love, in Kant's view, is an active commitment to promoting the happiness of others as they see it, not as we might interpret it (Kant, 1996: 198–199 [6:448–450]). Both affectionate and practical love, however, should be constrained and guided by respect for the friend as a human being. At least insofar as the friends are rationally and morally competent persons, their own choices and opinions, autonomy, and moral responsibility are to be recognized and respected. Suppose, for example, that you passionately love your friend and think it would make your friend happier if your friend would make a major life change that is neither morally wrong nor obligatory. Nevertheless, out of due respect for your friend as a human being, you must not try to take over or control the friend's decision by use of deception, manipulation, force, or other disrespectful interferences—or demean the friend afterwards for making the wrong decision. Even in the most intimate friendships, friends need and are owed some private space, opportunity, and encouragement to develop their own thoughts, aspirations, plans, and activities. In personal interactions of many kinds we need to constrain affectionate feelings and beneficent impulses with basic respect; and arguably for a similar reason, in global relations we should not let sympathetic feelings or an unqualified commitment to "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" lead us to treat with disrespect those we mean to help—or anyone else.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **4. Appreciation**

Let us consider now a moral ideal that is distinct from the more familiar ideals of beneficence and respect, namely the ideal of appreciation.

To appreciate something, as I understand it here, is to recognize and respond appropriately to its value as something worth attending to, observing, admiring, cherishing, or the like, for its own sake. In appreciating an object, we regard it as worthy of our positive attention independently of its value as a means to some other good thing, but the object of appreciation is not necessarily regarded as an end that we should try to *achieve* or a kind of thing that we must *produce* more of. Consider, for example, beautiful sunsets, cute kittens, and hearing a child's first words. What we appreciate is seen as good in itself, worth attending to and enjoying in an appropriate context, but not necessarily as the kind of thing that consequentialist philosophers propose as ultimate goals to pursue, such as pleasure, preference-satisfaction, or what G. E. Moore famously called an unanalyzable, non-natural property (Moore 1976). To say that a thing is good in itself, or valuable for its own sake, in a non-technical sense intended here is not to say that it is of a kind that always has as some weight on a scale of commensurable reasons ("pros and cons") that determine what one ought to do. The point, rather, is to offer a consideration for trying to see the thing itself, apart from its utility, as among those worthy of attention, liking, admiring, cherishing, commending, or the like, assuming an appropriate context.7

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

We can appreciate an aspect of something (e.g., an activity, a person, or a work of art) as good in this way despite the fact that it is embedded in a larger context that we recognize to be all-things-considered bad (e.g., harmful, immoral, ugly). Similarly, we can appreciate things, such as complex activities, personalities, and art works, as in themselves good and worthy of attention, admiration, and recommendation to others, even though we recognize aspects of these things as quite bad. There is an analogy here to Moore's principle of organic unities, which says that the intrinsic value of a whole is not the sum of the intrinsic value of its parts. That is, the parts (or aspects) of things and the whole things (or larger contexts) of which they are parts (or aspects) can be appreciated independently; but, contrary to the suggestion implicit in Moore's language, we should not think of intrinsic values as quantities that can be added and subtracted.

Appreciating works of art and beautiful natural scenery are paradigms of appreciation, but we can appreciate many kinds of things, including puzzles, elegant proofs, original ideas, graceful movements, acts of kindness, pleasant tastes, and meaningful personal experiences. In appreciating an object, we recognize, take in, or perhaps project onto things some degree of non-instrumental value or worth, but what we can appreciate is not just perfection or even what is *almost best* of its kind. Museum-goers in a hurry understandably move quickly past minor artworks in order to see the masterpieces, but this does not mean that they think that the minor works are not *worthy* of their attention. Similarly, we can appreciate a fifth-grade orchestral concert, or aspects of it, without imagining that this is the Chicago Symphony playing or needing to compare the two.

The attitude of appreciation is not the same as beneficence. Obviously, we can appreciate all sorts of things that we cannot benefit, aid, or do favors for. Consider sunsets, the ancient pyramids, philosophical problems, and "the starry heavens above" that Kant so admired. We can benefit people and animals but trying to improve their lot does not mean that we appreciate them, or vice versa. Consider a character I call the Distant Father who cares for his son's happiness, welfare, and success, but who does not even try to appreciate the person his son is now that the son is an adult living with his gay partner in the lifestyle of a Bohemian artist. Distant Father, as I imagine him, does not disapprove of or disrespect the son and stands ready to help him out as needed, but, as his son fears, Distant Father does not see anything worthy of his attention in his son's artwork, his loving relationship, his passion for old films, or indeed in the son himself.8 The beneficent disposition to promote a person's welfare does not necessarily translate to a readiness to appreciate what is good in a person and the person's life. The distinction between beneficence and appreciation can also be seen in a reverse kind of case. Imagine a cruel rival artist who readily appreciates the good in the son and his life but nevertheless tries to make the son's life miserable.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Appreciation is also distinct from basic (recognition) respect for a person. Distant Father, as described in the previous example, may have basic respect for his son as a human being, as shown (for example) by honoring his privacy and personal choices. We can imagine that Distant Father maintains this basic respect for all human beings, for he is scrupulous to honor their rights, acknowledge their status as moral equals, and avoid demeaning comments about them. Distant Father may also have some appraisal respect for the son, as shown, for example, by a readiness to give him character references (although this presupposes that at least Distant Father can appreciate his son's moral qualities). The distinction between basic respect and appreciation may be evident too in an opposite example—appreciation without basic respect. Imagine, again, the cruel rival artist who, lacking both beneficence and basic respect, nevertheless really understands and appreciates the son's qualities and passions and, all the more for that, wants to steal his work, insult him, and spread false rumor about him.

Finally, appreciation is not the same as gratitude, another virtue sometimes mentioned as important in personal relationships. We do often express gratitude by saying "I appreciate that," and this conveys the message that we acknowledge and *appreciate* a benefit and the good will of the person who bestowed it. So, we can say that genuine gratitude presupposes appreciation, but not that these are the same. Appreciation is a broader attitude than gratitude. One can appreciate what is intrinsically worthy of attention, admiration, and the like, in all sorts of things that are not gifts or services. Appreciating the beauty of sunsets and artworks is often pleasant, of course, and it may contribute to the observer's happiness, but the attitude of recognizing the intrinsic worth of something one sees, even if pleasant, is different from the attitudes of enjoying it, finding it pleasant, and seeing it as a benefit to oneself. When people take delight in appreciating art and nature, they may say that they that they thank God, Nature, or their lucky stars for their happiness; but atheists and scientific naturalists may appreciate and enjoy the same things without attributing them to a beneficent agent. More important, we can appreciate what is worthy of admiration in works of art, natural phenomena, and meritorious human lives without seeing these things as beneficial to us. Art can be corrupting, nature frightening, and virtue confining.

The ideal of appreciation in personal relationships, as I see it, is partly an extension of the more general ideal of being *open* to recognize and respond positively to intrinsic worth wherever one can find it. Obviously, there is more to appreciate than anyone has time for, and there is no moral imperative to appreciate all that one can or to maximally promote appreciation through the world. We can appreciate the worth of things for their aesthetic qualities and excellences of many kinds, but, in my view, the ideal of appreciation *in personal relationships* is a *moral* one, at least in the broad sense of "moral" that includes, not just duty, but all that is good to aspire for in a human life. It is sad when people become so busy, bitter, angry, or depressed that they can see nothing good in their lives beyond what is useful or immediately gratifying,9 and it is morally bad when, despite ample opportunity, they can see nothing good in the lives of friends and close associates. Those of us who can, ought at least to avoid this extreme lack of appreciation, and beyond that, I think, ideally we would aspire to be open to find and appreciate what is good in close associates and their lives, not to any particular determinate degree, but as appropriate to the circumstances. Insofar as appreciation is an ideal, conformity cannot be demanded as anyone's right and neglect should not be considered blameworthy by others or one's punitive conscience. But context matters, and sometimes in particular relationships, perhaps like Distant Father's with his son, one would be wrong not to try harder be appreciative.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **5. Conclusion**

My proposal has been to consider the three basic attitudes described here beneficence, respect, and appreciation—as ideals particularly significant in close personal relationships, but obviously they raise many questions. For one thing, we may wonder, why should one want to supplement familiar discussions of respect and care in moral theory by adding an ideal of appreciation? There are several reasons to hope that a satisfactory account of appreciation can be added.

First, and most obviously, normative moral theorists aim to explain and refine common moral thought judiciously, and arguably the proposed ideal of appreciation described here reflects common thought sufficiently to warrant a place in a systematic theory.

Second, more interestingly, the proposal may partly address a persistent objection to Kantian theories of respect. The objection is that basic (recognition) respect for a person as a human being is really respect for humanity (or rational nature), which is a property that all human beings share; but the respect that we want, especially from close associates, is respect for oneself as the very individual that one is. To the reply that there can also be deserved appraisal respect, the critic can rightly note that this respect amounts to high marks for merits that an individual (along with many others) may be judged to have, but what the critic thinks is missing is *being respected, valued, or taken seriously as "the very person I am."*

Now it is not entirely clear to me what exactly this means and whether there are always legitimate grounds for giving what is wanted; but in any case, supplementing ideals of beneficence and respect with an ideal of appreciation may be helpful. Appreciating a particular friend fully as an individual would involve understanding, recognizing, and responding favorably to the vast array of the friend's features, uniquely combined, especially those features with which she identifies; and this is more than judging or appraising the friend's merits (for example, as teacher, a tennis player, or a parent). There is no guarantee, of course, that each individual has many particular features that are intrinsically worthy of appreciation, but for most, if not all, there should be little to complain about if friends *cared* for them, *respected* them, *and appreciated* them, according to the ideals presented here.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Third, more speculatively, contemporary Kantian moral theory could perhaps gain in plausibility, without loss of its distinctive merits, if it incorporated an ideal of appreciation along with its principles of respect and beneficence. A distinctive merit of Kantian ethics, I think, has been its refusal to reduce the criteria for morally permissible conduct to whatever most effectively promotes a final end. Too often, before Kant and after, moral philosophers have seen their task as the two-stage process: first find the final goal, the *summum bonum*; and then prescribe the kinds of choices and traits of character that best promote it. In ancient ethics, on one reading, Aristotle proposed happiness, or flourishing as a human being, as the final good and then described the virtues as traits that enable fortunate citizens to achieve or approximate it. In the early twentieth century G. E. Moore introduced a confused technical notion of intrinsic goodness, and then claimed that the duty-determining goal to be promoted is the greatest possible amount of intrinsic goodness that one could bring about. Kantian ethics and Rawls's theory of justice have had a special appeal for me, and doubtless others, because they reject the goal-oriented approach to ethics, an approach loosely described by the slogan "the good is prior to the right." So far, so good, I think. But my conjecture is that once we reject Moore's extraordinary idea of intrinsic goodness, with its metaphysical and epistemological problems, and give up the two-step goaldominated approach to ethics, then there is room for taking seriously ordinary, commonsense judgments of intrinsic worth that are exemplified in appreciation of nature, art, and innumerable other things. In personal relationships, basic respect no doubt takes priority and beneficence is vitally important, but the pursuit of a moral and good life would be impoverished if there were no place for appreciation.

### **Notes**

- 1. This essay expands on themes initially developed for a discussion of attitudes towards disabilities (Hill 2020). I am grateful to Adam Cureton and Richard Dean for the helpful comments and editorial suggestions.
- 2. Sometimes we identify a "deed" or act, such as giving aid, independently of its motives, such as kindness, a sense of duty, or a desire to appear generous, though we can also speak of deeds or acts in terms that imply motives. For example, "giving aid" describes a deed in the first way and "a kind act" in the second way. The nephew's good deed was giving aid but it was not an act of kindness.
- 3. Different views on beneficent giving are represented in Woodruff (2018: 13–39).
- 4. Cureton (2020); Sensen (2018).
- 5. It is perhaps appropriate to note that the German word *Achtung* is translated as *respect* as well as a call for *attention*.
- 6. This point is most obvious for those identified as rule-utilitarians but act-utilitarians and virtually any other consequentialist will surely grant that many of the historically developed conventional norms that we have are justified and deserve respect. The difference between these types of theory lies in their implications regarding exceptions to rules that normally should be respected. Roughly, if it would actually promote the best consequences to deviate from a rule obedience to which usually promotes the best consequences, then act-consequentialism implies that it is right to deviate while rule-consequentialists say that one must stick to the rule unless the rule has a justified "built-in" exception clause for the situation.
- 7. A non-technical use of "good in itself," distinct from G.E. Moore's, is discussed further in Hill (2006).
- 8. The example is from Hill (2020).
- 9. The point is beautifully made by Keller (1933).

### **References**

- Aristotle, 1999. *Nicomachean Ethics*, trans. Terence Irwin, 2nd edition, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Bentham, Jeremy, 2003. *The Classic Utilitarians*, ed. John Troyer, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Butler, Joseph, 1983. *Five Sermons*, ed. Stephen Darwall, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Crisp, Roger, 2017. "Well-Being." In: *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*, [https](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/well-being):// [plato.stanford.edu/entries/well-being](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/well-being)/.
- Cureton, Adam, 2020. "The Limiting Role of Respect." In: *The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Disability*, ed. Adam Cureton and David Wasserman, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Darwall, Stephen, 1977. "Two Kinds of Respect." *Ethics* 88: 36–49.
- Darwall, Stephen, 2015. "Respect and Honor and Accountability." In: *Reason, Value, and Respect: Kantian Themes from the Philosophy of Thomas E. Hill, Jr*., ed. Mark Timmons and Robert N. Johnson, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Dillon, Robin, 1992. "Respect and Care: Towards Moral Integration." *Canadian Journal of Philosophy* 22: 105–132.

- Doris, John, 2002. *Lack of Character: Personality and Moral Behavior*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Epictetus, 1983. *The Handbook* (*The Encheiridion*), trans. Nicholas White, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Epicurus, 1994. *The Epicurus Reader*, trans. Brad Inwood, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Hill, Thomas, Jr., 2006. "Finding Value in Nature." *Environmental Value* 15: 331–341.
- Hill, Thomas, Jr., 2020. "Ideals of Appreciation and Expressions of Respect." In: *The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Disability*, ed. Adam Cureton and David Wasserman, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Kant, Immanuel, 1996. *The Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. Mary Gregor, 2nd edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Kant, Immanuel, 2002. *Groundwork for the Metaphysics of* Morals, ed. Thomas Hill, Jr. and Arnulf Zweig, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Keller, Helen, 1933. "Three Days to See." *The Atlantic Monthly*, January: 35–42.
- Mill, John Stuart, 2001. *Utilitarianism*, ed. George Sher, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
- Moore, G. E., 1976. *Principia Ethica*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Rawls, John, 1999. *A Theory of Justice*, 2nd edition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Scanlon, Thomas, 2000. *What We Owe Each Other*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Sensen, Oliver, 2018. "Respect for Human Beings with Intellectual Disabilities." In: *Disability in Practice: Attitudes, Policies, and Relationships*, ed. Adam Cureton and Thomas E. Hill, Jr., Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Strawson, Peter, 1961. "Social Morality and Individual Ideal." *Philosophy* 36: 1–17.
- Wolf, Susan, 1982. "Moral Saints." *Journal of Philosophy* 79: 419–439.
- Woodruff, Paul (ed.), 2018. *The Ethics of Giving*: *Philosophers' Perspectives on Philanthropy*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.