
P.L. 1999, Win, 682-702

Public Law

1999

# Human dignity as a legal value: Part 1

David Feldman

© 2013 Sweet & Maxwell and its Contributors

Subject: Human rights. Other Related Subject: Constitutional law

Keywords: Human rights; International law

*682 There is a powerful sense that dignity, or as it is sometimes called “human dignity”, is central to a valuable human life. This feeling is reflected in the preambles to a number of human-rights treaties, which commonly refer to human dignity as one of the objects of protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms. Late twentieth-century constitutions have also come to rely on human dignity as a foundation for, or objective of, the good life for which they seek to provide the political conditions. In this way, dignity has been seen as underpinning what one might call “legal humanism”, and has profoundly influenced the recent development of constitutional jurisprudence in a number of states, including France, Germany, Hungary, Israel and South Africa.

Yet discussing dignity in the context of fundamental constitutional rights and freedoms presents a special challenge. The canon of fundamental rights and freedoms is controversial and indeterminate, but it is still more difficult to pin down the meaning of dignity. Few people would argue that dignity, in the abstract, is unimportant. On the other hand, the meaning of the word is by no means straightforward, and its relationship with fundamental rights is unclear. The notion that dignity can itself be a fundamental right is superficially appealing but ultimately unconvincing. We are conceived and born, and most of us live and die, in circumstances of significant indignity. It seems (at least to someone of my pessimistic cast of mind) that human dignity is a desirable state, an aspiration, which some people manage to achieve some of the time, rather than a right. Nevertheless, human rights, when adequately protected, can improve the chances of realising the aspiration. With that in mind, this article explores the place of dignity in international human-rights law and constitutional law. It also considers how dignity is protected in English law. The United *683 Kingdom's constitution and law are in a state of flux. Alongside the traditional, dualist approach to international human-rights law, we are about to embark (indeed, to some extent have already done so1 ) on a new adventure with human rights based on most of those in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (1950, henceforth “the E.C.H.R.”) becoming part of national law, via the Human Rights Act 1998, on 2 October 2000.2 This may have the effect of increasing the weight given to human dignity under our constitution.

Dignity, humanity, and the role of law

The concept of dignity has been used in a variety of legal contexts, and attached to different types of legal entities which are held to be worthy of respect. In public international law, for example, it has been common to speak of the “dignity of States”, a rhetorical expression connoting the respect which is due for the political autonomy and jurisdictional independence of sovereign states. This is an aspect of the more general concept of national sovereignty, and has particular importance in relation to the rules concerned with sovereign and diplomatic immunity. In R. v. Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, ex p. Pinochet Ugarte (No. 3), 3 Lord Browne-Wilkinson referred to the immunity from suit of a diplomat in the courts of a foreign state as being conferred by international law “in recognition of the dignity of the state which he represents”. Lord Millett explained the immunity from suit or prosecution of a serving head of state ratione personae as flowing from his special status as “the personal embodiment of the state itself. It would be an affront to the dignity and sovereignty of the state which he personifies and a denial of the equality of sovereign states to subject him to the jurisdiction of the municipal courts of another state, whether in respect of his public acts or private affairs”.4

However, the dignity of States has nothing to do with the notion of dignity as it operates in human-rights or constitutional law. This is the dignity of individuals, which is to be protected against (rather than asserted by) state authorities. Where a state interferes with human dignity and the interest in dignity is protected by international tribunals or the courts of other countries, human dignity and state dignity collide, as occurred notably in Ex parte Pinochet Ugarte (No. 3). They are also in conflict where one state offers refuge to nationals of another state on the ground that the latter state cannot be relied on to protect those people from persecution, as in Islam v. Secretary of State for the Home Department; R. v. Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex p. Shah. 5 It is the idea of human, as distinct from state, dignity that has significantly influenced the *684 development of post-World-War-II international law and of modern international human-rights law. Human dignity can operate on three levels: the dignity attaching to the whole human species; the dignity of groups within the human species; and the dignity of human individuals. The legal implications of each kind of dignity are slightly different.

The dignity of the species as a whole relates mainly to the objective aspect of dignity. It requires rules which discriminate in relevant ways between humans and other species, and which protect the special status and integrity of the species. This might be done, for example, by legal regimes designed to prevent or regulate artificial interference with both the process of human reproduction and the naturalness of the genetic constitution of the human race (a regime administered in the United Kingdom by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority under the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990). For example, in France when the Conseil constitutionnel was asked to consider the constitutional validity of two laws to regulate the use of body parts and body products, medically assisted procreation and prenatal diagnostic techniques, the protection of human dignity (in the sense of the dignity of the whole species) was treated as a fundamental constitutional principle. As a result, the constitutionality of the laws was assessed partly by reference to the effect of the provisions on human dignity. Because the laws gave no rights of ownership in the human body, and took account of the importance of safeguarding the integrity of the human species in the system of bioethics which they instituted, the laws were held to conform to the constitution.6 By extension, the notion of the dignity of the entire human species may have implications for the regulation of the food chain, the environment, and other matters, potentially giving rise to social and economic rights.

The second category of dignity, that of groups within the species, has both objective and subjective aspects, particularly in respect of the way in which groups visualise and constitute themselves, and the way in which individuals relate to the group. This category requires rules which prevent discrimination between groups on irrelevant grounds, and enable the groups to assert a right to respect for their existence and at least some of their traditions which is at least equal to that of other groups. Rules against genocide and apartheid, and those outlawing incitement to racial hatred and permitting remedies to be given for group libels, fall into this category. The third category, the dignity of individuals, is often (but, as the Bland case illustrated, not always) concerned mainly with the subjective aspect of dignity. The law upholds it in different ways. In Roman law, the delict iniuria was significantly concerned with dignity, and in English law Professor Peter Birks has argued that the way in which aggravated damages may be awarded for defamation demonstrates that the law has regard to the dignity and feelings of those who are defamed.7 Other aspects *685 of individual dignity are upheld in other ways. The right to make one's own decisions about many aspects of one's fate, and to contribute to decisions made by others which affect one's life, can be seen as a major contribution to an individual's dignity, linking the notion to a Kantian perspective on morality. It is clearly protected in English law by the law requiring consent to medical treatment, and the rules of fairness and natural justice in administrative law giving a right to have one's voice heard in matters which affect one, but there are many other rules of law which also contribute to maintaining individual's dignity by protecting autonomy and moral integrity.

So far we have seen how the notion of human dignity can bolster individual freedom by making it desirable to enhance autonomy and moral integrity or to provide social and political rights to an infrastructure which enables people to live in a dignified way. In respect of classic liberal rights, the dignity of the species and the dignity of the individual tend to work together. For example, treating corporal punishment as degrading within the meaning of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights reflects a sense that in certain circumstances it degrades both the individual and the whole of humanity to treat people in such a way. But we must not assume that the idea of dignity is inextricably linked to a liberal-individualist view of human beings as people whose life-choices deserve respect. If the state takes a particular view on what is required for people to live dignified lives, it may introduce regulations to restrict the freedom which people have to make choices which, in the state's view, interfere with the dignity of the individual, a social group or the human race as a whole. Restrictions on assisting suicide and on the capacity to give legally effective consent to certain practices or procedures provide examples of this. We will see examples of this later in the paper. The quest for human dignity may subvert rather than enhance choice, and in some circumstances may limit rather than extend the scope of traditional “first-generation” human rights and fundamental freedoms. Once it becomes a tool in the hands of lawmakers and judges, the concept of human dignity is a two-edged sword.

The perplexing capacity of dignity to pull in several directions is enhanced by the fact that human dignity (at least at the levels of the social group and the individual) has two aspects, either or both of which may be present in any particular case. The first is subjective, concerned with one's sense of self-worth, which is usually associated with forms of behaviour which communicate that sense to others. Typically this is reflected in a readiness to confront the realities of one's circumstances, including talents and physical and mental limitations, and make the best of them without losing hope and a sense that one's life is worthwhile; to live according to a set of normative standards, whether accepted from outside or imposed from within, accepting both burdens and benefits in full measure; and readiness to accept responsibility for the consequences of one's own actions and decisions.8 The second aspect of dignity is objective, *686 concerned with the state's and other people's attitudes to an individual or group, usually in the light of social norms or expectations. It is in this sense that people who lack the capacity to cultivate the subjective aspect of dignity can nevertheless be said to have a type of dignity which demands respect. For example, very young children and patients in a persistent vegetative state can be regarded as having intrinsic human dignity in this objective sense, in that responsible beings owe a moral, and often a legal, duty to have regard to their interests and rights when making decisions affecting their welfare. Many people would agree that there are certain things which cannot be done even to unconscious or dependent people without violating their dignity and denying them the respect which is due to them as fellow-creatures inhabiting a common moral universe.9

In each of these aspects, dignity can be either a description of a personal characteristic or a normative requirement. Often it is both. Saying of someone that he or she displays dignity superficially describes their behaviour and personality. It is in the sense that the Oxford English Dictionary provides, as one of the meanings of dignity, “The quality of being worthy or honourable; worthiness, worth, nobleness, excellence”,10 and gives a meaning of the related adjective “dignified” as “Marked by dignity of manner, style or appearance; characterized by lofty self-respect without haughtiness; stately, noble, majestic”.11 But there are social values which lie behind the description to make it possible to identify that sort of behaviour or personality as good or worthwhile. In this way, ideas about descriptions of dignity are linked to beliefs about what is involved in living a good life, and to ideas of the Good more generally. As Alasdair Macintyre has shown, such ideas are culturally specific, and consensus in relation to them is difficult to maintain in a pluralist society.12 Nevertheless, it is important that we strive to uphold a consensus, because without it we would lose one of the bases for mutual respect. Conversely, a claim that humanity, or humans, has or have a special dignity does not so much describe how they should behave as prescribe how others should behave towards them. It is shorthand for claiming that people, groups or other creatures ought to be treated in particular ways which advance or do not unduly interfere with the acquisition or maintenance of whatever respect, self-respect, characteristics or bearing or behaviour are associated with the idea of dignity in either its subjective or its objective aspect. In relation to the subjective aspect of dignity, the law of human rights will typically be concerned to prevent treatment which damages a person's self-respect and physical or moral integrity. With regard to the objective aspect, the law will usually have to go further, imposing *687 positive duties on people to act in ways which optimise the conditions for social respect and dignity.

Dignity is thus not an end in itself, or even a means to an end. It is rather an expression of an attitude to life which we as humans should value when we see it in others as an expression of something which gives particular point and poignancy to the human condition. By its nature, dignity can be neither pursued nor used, but only lived, fostered, enhanced and admired. It follows that it can generally make little or no sense to talk of a right to dignity. The law can at best provide a circumscribing circle of rights which, in some of their effects, help to preserve the field for a dignified life. There is a link, albeit not always clear, between the notions of dignity, honour, and reputation. Honour figures significantly in German constitutional law, which is founded on the idea of human dignity, but has little place in English law, although Birks has argued that a right to equality of respect underpins what he identifies as the development of a tort of contemptuous harassment, similar to the Roman delict of iniuria. 13 Reputation, by contrast, is directly protected in important ways by English law. However, there is a subordinate and, in my view, weak sense in which one might indeed talk about a right to dignity. Instead of being an attractive quality, a person may have an unattractive sense of his or her own dignity (in the sense of rank or position, or associated supposed entitlement to deference) which stems from a (usually exaggerated) sense of self-importance and superiority. It is in this sense that people are said to stand on their dignity. A right to dignity in this sense is a right not to be treated in such a way that the balloon of one's self-importance is punctured or which makes one look silly (or sillier than usual) in the eyes of other people. This, however, is not human dignity of the sort which could conceivably be treated, in a sane world, as a fundamental value, or as capable of generating a fundamental constitutional right. In a refreshingly direct and commonsensical dissenting judgment in Berkoff v. Burchill, 14 where a film actor and director sued a reviewer for writing that he was “hideously ugly”, Millett L.J. (as he then was) said:

People must be allowed to poke fun at one another without fear of litigation. It is one thing to ridicule a man; it is another to expose him to ridicule. Miss Burchill made a cheap joke at Mr. Berkoff's expense; she may thereby have demeaned herself, but I do not believe that she defamed Mr. Berkoff. If I have appeared to treat Mr. Berkoff's claim with unjudicial levity it is because I find it impossible to take it seriously. Despite the views of my brethren, who are both far more experienced than I am, I remain of the opinion that the proceedings are as frivolous as Miss Burchill's article. The time of the court ought not to be taken up with either of them.

There is another link between the ideas of dignity, respect, and moral integrity, which the European Court of Human Rights has developed in its jurisprudence under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR. These are serious matters *688 deserving a measure of protection. Respect (for oneself and for others) is an important element in dignity, in both its subjective and its objective aspects. Dignity and respect are not the same, but at their best they can feed one another. Similarly dignity and autonomy are related, mainly when dignity is used in its subjective sense. There can be a claim to dignity in respect of those who lack the full capacity for autonomy. Such a claim was made in the case of Tony Bland in relation to the duty to treat with respect a patient in a persistent vegetative state.15 This is dignity in its objective aspect. It should be noted, however, that there is room for disagreement as to what legal obligations dignity of this sort entails. Is dignity advanced more effectively by requiring hospital authorities to continue to feed the patient indefinitely, or by allowing them to withhold nourishment in order to put an end, in as dignified a way as possible, to an existence which some regard as intrinsically undignified? If the latter, how far is it conducive to a person's dignity to allow him or her to die slowly of thirst and starvation, rather than dispatching them quickly and painlessly with a lethal dose of morphine or some similar substance? Accepting that one should respect the obligations flowing from the objective aspect of dignity sometimes does little to tell us what those obligations should be. They depend on other, deeper principles concerning the nature of the good life and the intrinsic value of life itself. It seems, then, that speaking of human dignity is a way of expressing a set of moral problems rather than a technique for resolving them (in hard cases at any rate). Yet treaties and constitutions have been drafted, and tribunals have framed their decisions, in terms of human dignity, so the next two sections of this article examine the legal meaning and impact of using the term in those contexts.

The place of dignity in international human-rights law

The desire to promote human dignity underlies many of the rights under post-World War II international human-rights instruments, even if the notion has been more often deployed than analysed. The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations (1945) states:

We the peoples of the United Nations determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind, and to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, … have resolved to combine our efforts to accomplish these aims.

The Preamble to the Universal Declaration on Human Rights (United Nations, 1948) also refers to the dignity and worth of the human person.

The Preambles to both the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966) include declarations “that, in accordance with the principles in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent dignity and of the *689 equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world” and “that these rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person”. Similar reliance on the dignity of the human person as a justification for enforcing human rights appears from many other instruments, including the ECHR, which refers in its Preamble to the U.N. Declaration on Human Rights and in respect of which the Strasbourg organs have frequently referred to human dignity as one of the values underpinning the rights.

Relying on “the inherent dignity of the human person” as a foundation for rights is different from conferring a right to dignity. It was suggested above that dignity is a quality or characteristic of human beings, so that an individual cannot have a right to it. On the other hand, one clearly has an interest in having one's human dignity respected, and this may support more specific rights. The fundamental, shared quality of human beings gives rise automatically to an irrebuttable presumption of human dignity, which attaches to individuals by virtue of their membership of the human species. An umbrella of rights may be justified as preventing interference with this general human dignity. Subordinate forms of dignity, derived from an individual's personal qualities and behaviour, may for some purposes also be sufficiently valuable to justify a right to protection. Such protective rights could be termed “rights to dignity” in so far as they have the object of upholding dignity indirectly.

However, even in this limited form the right to human dignity appears in human-rights instruments only in certain circumstances. One occasionally comes across an express right to dignity in international human-rights law. For example, the American Convention on Human Rights, Article 11(1) provides, “Everyone has the right to have his honor respected and his dignity recognized”. The Inter-American Commission has concluded that the vaginal search and inspection of members of a prisoner's family as a condition of allowing them to visit him violated the family members' rights to honor and dignity, because “it involves a particularly intimate aspect of a woman's private life” and the procedure “is likely to provoke intense feelings of shame and anguish in almost all persons subjected to it. In addition, subjecting a 13-year old child to such a procedure could result in serious psychological damage that is difficult to evaluate”.16 This express provision for a right to respect for dignity does not actually include a right to dignity as such, and even in the form of an express right to respect for dignity it is unusual, being specifically mentioned as a right mainly in relation to situations which are particularly likely to lead to an assault on dignity.

The primary situations in which there is an express right to dignity are those where people have lost their liberty, whether for their own good, the protection of the public, or pursuant to criminal proceedings. For example, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), Article 10(1) provides, “All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person”, and the *690 remainder of Article 10 makes particular provision for detained suspects and convicted prisoners. The U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), Article 37(c) provides that, where children are deprived of their liberty they have the right to be treated “with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of their age”, and “shall be separated from adults unless it is considered to be in the child's best interests not to do so …”. Article 28(2) of the 1989 Convention requires States Parties to “take all appropriate measures to ensure that school discipline is administered in a manner consistent with the child's human dignity…”, although this is part of a progressive programme rather than an immediate right.

These are special cases. Generally, instead of giving a right to dignity to every adult, international human-rights instruments require institutional (including legal) arrangements in states to respect people's inherent human dignity. International human rights provide a framework of side-constraints which restrict the freedom of public authorities and, sometimes, others to violate human dignity in specified ways. In this way, the desirability of upholding human dignity becomes one of a number of important background considerations in the light of which specific human rights fall to be interpreted.

In view of the wide-ranging significance of human dignity as a justification for conferring and protecting human rights, there is arguably no human right which is unconnected to human dignity. Nevertheless, some rights seem to have a particularly prominent role in upholding human dignity. These include the right to be free of inhuman or degrading treatment, the right to respect for private and family life, the right to freedom of conscience and belief, the right to freedom of association, the right to marry and found a family, and the right to be free of discriminatory treatment. Apart from freedom from inhuman and degrading treatment (which is concerned with both dignity and physical integrity), these are not principally directed to protecting dignity. Family life, conscience, association, marriage, and non-discrimination are more directly geared to protecting the interests in autonomy, equality and respect. Nevertheless, autonomy, equal respect and self-respect are important in providing circumstances in which dignity can flourish, and rights which protect them usefully, if indirectly, buttress dignity. There are also social and economic rights, such as the right of those unable to provide for themselves to receive by way of social assistance at least the support (including money and accommodation) necessary to maintain life in ways reasonably conducive to minimum levels of human dignity. Other rights which recognise the importance of dignity and may, in some circumstances, contribute to its maintenance include the right to life, the right to be free of arbitrary arrest and detention, the right to due process in legal proceedings, and the right to freedom of expression.

The right to be free of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment: Article 3 ECHR

As the international human rights case-law shows, there are certain kinds of treatment which are simply incompatible with the idea that one is dealing with *691 a human being who, as such, is entitled to respect for his or her humanity and dignity. Torture and inhuman or degrading treatment are of this kind. Degrading treatment was described by the European Commission of Human Rights in the Greek Case as follows: “Treatment or punishment of an individual may be said to be degrading if it grossly humiliates him before others or drives him to act against his will or conscience”.17 The distinction between degrading treatment and inhuman treatment relates to the degree of suffering caused, whether physical or mental, although as distinguished authorities on the subject have pointed out, “in several cases the Strasbourg organs do not draw a sharp distinction and use qualifications such as ‘inhuman and degrading treatment”’.18

It is the view of the Strasbourg organs that, when assessing whether treatment is degrading, the degree of humiliation must be considered, having regard to the nature of the treatment or punishment, the circumstances in which it occurs, and the method of its application.19 The treatment must reach a minimum level of objective severity, and must also sufficiently severely “lower the person in rank, position, reputation or character” (although this is by no means an exhaustive definition of degradation for Article 3 purposes) to justify bringing the matter under Article 3.20 It must therefore produce results which go well beyond mere embarrassment. For example, in B v. France 21 French authorities refused to change a transsexual's official documents, including the identity card which a person may be required to produce for inspection for a wide range of purposes, to reflect the reassigned gender. This was held to violate the transsexual's right to respect for private life under Article 8 of the ECHR, but not to cause such serious degradation as to amount to degrading treatment under Article 3.

The significance of this right for the protection of dignity lies in the fact that Article 3 has repeatedly been said to have as its object the protection of the victim's dignity as well as his or her physical integrity. For instance, in Tyrer v. United Kingdom 22 the court held that the applicant's judicial birching amounted to degrading punishment at least in part because of the circumstances of indignity and humiliation under which the birching was inflicted. In Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v. United Kingdom 23 the court decided that the United Kingdom's immigration policy was not degrading within the meaning of Article 3, although it discriminated against women legally resident in the *692 United Kingdom whose husbands were not entitled to reside here as compared with legally resident men with wives who had no right to reside. While there was sexual discrimination, the court noted (para. 91) that “the difference of treatment complained of did not denote any contempt or lack of respect for the personality of the applicants and that it was not designed to, and did not, humiliate or debase … It cannot therefore be regarded as degrading.” But in the East African Asians case,24 the Commission had taken a different view, holding that immigration legislation which imposed tighter controls on immigrants from the New Commonwealth than from the Old discriminated against African Asians on the ground of race in ways which lowered them in their own estimation and that of others so as to violate Article 3. The link between subjecting members of a group to less favourable treatment than members of other groups, and the impact on their self-respect and dignity, was of significance. (Immigration law in the United Kingdom has since been changed to eradicate direct discrimination by reference to race, but some indirect discrimination is more difficult to remove.) The Commission's approach is more likely than the court's to generate a right to the protection of group (rather than individual) dignity against discriminatory treatment.

Rape, other violence, and the systematic destruction of the homes and lifestyles of a group within society are of their nature degrading and violate Article 3, a proposition which (if authority for it is needed) was established by the European Court of Human Rights in Aydin v. Turkey. 25 They are attacks on dignity: individual dignity in the case of rape; group dignity in the case of “ethnic cleansing”. In the case of rape in England and Wales, the courts have taken action to remove the common-law protection of husbands against liability for rape if they have sexual intercourse with their wives without consent, protecting women's dignity as well as their right to respect for their autonomy and physical and moral integrity.26 In S.W. v. United Kingdom, 27 the European Court of Human Rights unanimously rejected the defendants' claims that this piece of judicial legislation had violated their right under Article 7 of the ECHR not to be subjected to criminal penalties for an act which had not been unlawful at the time it took place. As the court wrote, “The decisions of the Court of Appeal and then the House of Lords did no more than continue a perceptible line of case-law development dismantling the immunity of a husband from prosecution for rape upon his wife”. As a result, “There was no doubt under the law as it stood … that a husband who forcibly had sexual intercourse with his wife could, in certain circumstances, be found guilty of rape. Moreover, there was an evident evolution, which was consistent with the very essence of the offence, of the criminal law through judicial interpretation towards treating such conduct generally as within the scope of the offence of rape … [J]udicial recognition of the absence of immunity had become a reasonably foreseeable development of the law”.28

*693 Furthermore:

The essentially debasing character of rape is so manifest that the result of the decisions … cannot be said to be at variance with the object and purpose of Article 7 of the Convention, namely to ensure that no one should be subjected to arbitrary prosecution, conviction or punishment … What is more, the abandonment of the unacceptable idea of a husband being immune against prosecution for rape of his wife was in conformity not only with a civilised concept of marriage but also, and above all, with the fundamental objectives of the Convention, the very essence of which is respect for human dignity and human freedom.29

Another of the ways in which a person can be sufficiently demeaned is to impose medical treatment on him or her without his or her consent. In Herczegfalvy v. Austria , the European Commission of Human Rights decided unanimously that this could violate the right to be free of inhuman or degrading treatment under Article 3 of the ECHR.30 However, when that case reached the court, it was held that a therapeutic measure taken in accordance with accepted standards of medical practice and necessary in the patient's best interests will not amount to degrading treatment.31 This unfortunate decision goes a very long way towards removing the protection of Article 3 standards from some of those people most at risk of having their dignity, autonomy and physical integrity invaded by official action. In these circumstances, it is important to establish the limits of the decision. It should not be thought that it established a general principle permitting medical intervention without the patient's consent. The Herczegfalvy case related to a compulsorily detained psychiatric patient. It would certainly normally violate Article 3 to subject to compulsory treatment a person who is capable of deciding whether to accept such treatment, save in the rare case of a person needing treatment to preserve life when the state is responsible for his or her welfare as a result of imprisonment or similar arrangements (as in Herczegfalvy ). In such a case, there is prima facie a breach of Article 3--as the court held in Ribitsch v. Austria ,32 “any recourse to physical force which has not been made strictly necessary by his own conduct diminishes human dignity and is in principle an infringement of the right set forth in Article 3”--but it is justified by reference to the state's responsibilities under Article 2, in respect of the detainee's right to life.

This interaction of the rights under Articles 2 and 3 presents special problems in relation to the treatment of patients suffering from certain medical conditions, including persistent vegetative state and anorexia nervosa, those whose medical treatment is complicated by their religious beliefs, and sometimes pregnant women where the life of the foetus seems to be threatened. More will be said about these cases later.

*694 The rights to respect for private and family life and to be free of discrimination: Articles 8 and 14 ECHR, etc.

The court has held that the right to respect for private and family life imposes duties on the state to protect people against attacks on their moral, as well as physical, integrity in a range of fields (including sexuality). Both physical and moral integrity are part of the “private life” which must be respected under Article 8.33 The court has so far not defined moral integrity, but it seems to be related both to dignity and to freedom from coercion in respect of choice concerning one's decisions and life-style. In Costello-Roberts v. United Kingdom 34 the court left open the possibility that beating a child might be a violation of his, or his parents', moral integrity as well as of his physical integrity, as such potentially giving rise to a violation of Article 8. It is true that in many contexts rights under Article 8 are concerned at least as much with autonomy as with dignity and moral integrity, but the lawfulness of beating children seems to relate to their parents' autonomy rather than the children's autonomy. So far as the children are concerned, it is their physical and moral integrity and dignity that are mainly threatened.

Article 8 also has an impact on surveillance operations, overt or covert, which may significantly damage the dignity of those being observed. It takes only a little imagination to perceive the effect on one's dignity of discovering that one's unsuccessful attempt at suicide, the spectacle of one getting dressed, or one's exotic sexual practices in public or semi-public spaces, or even one's efforts in a private gymnasium, have been not only recorded but also made available to people generally for their amusement. Such surveillance and publicity damage one's dignity, and prima facie represent an infringement of the right to respect for private and family life, especially where the surveillance (human or mechanical) extends into spheres of personal intimacy. Article 8 allows such infringements to be justified only if the state can demonstrate that the infringement is in accordance with the law in the sense of being regulated by law in accordance with rule-of-law principles, and is necessary (in the sense of being a proportionate response to a pressing social need) for one of a number of specified purposes in a democratic society (meaning that the interference must not subvert democratic principles or the pluralism and openmindedness which are necessary in a democratic society).35 Furthermore, the interference must not be so extensive as to defeat the very core of the right. These are demanding standards, and are essential to maintaining a balance between the core of human dignity and legitimate public interests. In this way, dignity is indirectly protected by Article 8.

*695 Dignity is linked to, although not identical with, status. Questions of status of all kinds give rise to issues many of which are related to discrimination. A group's dignity may be infringed by discriminatory treatment or legislation, and an individual's dignity may be hurt by being treated as an inferior under family law, employment law or any other area. A person's civil status can have important implications for their rights of entry to and residence in a state, their rights of inheritance, child-care arrangements, and the application of a wide range of human rights. The European Court of Human Rights held relatively early in its work that the right to respect for private life included a right that the law of the family and inheritance should respect de facto relationships, and should not discriminate against a child on the basis of the married or unmarried status of his or her parents.36 Belgian law preventing illegitimate children from inheriting from parents' families also violated the right under Article 14 not to be discriminated against in the protection of other rights.

The court also held Article 8 to have been violated in B v. France ,37 where the state had refused to issue new civil status documents to the complainant, a transsexual, showing the reassigned rather than the original gender and new forenames. The public accessibility of the documents, and their purpose as an up-to-date record of the civil status of the citizen, subjected the complainant to a sufficiently serious level of distress and inconvenience to amount to a violation of Article 8. This was so despite the court's refusal to depart from earlier cases holding that refusal to change a birth certificate to record a reassignment of gender could not yet be said in itself to amount to a violation of Article 8 (although the court's position on this seems to be changing, as the recent decision in Sheffield and Horsham v. United Kingdom 38 suggests). There can be no doubt that one's dignity is seriously undermined by having to produce documents or make declarations which disclose that one has changed one's gender, and non-recognition of gender reassignment places serious difficulties in the way of transsexuals wishing to exercise their prima facie right under Article 12 ECHR to marry and found a family.39

Discrimination on the basis of status, etc., is thus a major assault on dignity. Although Article 14 ECHR is limited in effect, there is a free-standing antidiscrimination right in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), Article 26:

All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law. In this respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee to all persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.

*696 Article 8 of the ECHR contains no right to reputation or honour as part of private life. The nearest thing to it in the ECHR is the provision in Article 10(2) making the protection of the reputation of others a legitimate ground for interfering with the right to freedom to expression. However, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Article 17, provides that everyone has the right to the protection of the law against attacks on his honour and reputation. While reputation may be more closely linked to status than to dignity, the two are related to each other, and while honour may not mean the same as dignity in this context, it is certainly linked to it.

The right to freedom of conscience and belief, association, and education: Articles 9 and 11 and Protocol 1, Article 2 ECHR

Taking action against people because of their beliefs is an assault on their dignity in the widest sense: one can see conscience as one of the fundamental aspects of human capacity, and interfering with freedom of conscience prevents people both from choosing a set of values by which to live and from giving effect to those values. While the state has a legitimate interest in restraining the effectuation of choices which have seriously anti-social effects, arbitrary interference with freedom of conscience (including choices about children's education) opens the way to the devaluing of religious or other groups within society and their exclusion, making both group and individual dignity hard to maintain.

The right to due process in legal proceedings

There is a theory according to which one of the reasons (if not the main or only one) for conferring due-process rights on people is to mark the importance to people's dignity and sense of worth of involving them in the process of making decisions which affect them. On this view, due-process rights such as those provided under Article 6 and, to a lesser extent, Article 5 of the ECHR are dignitary rights. Against this, one can set the views of those such as Professor Denis Galligan who argue that the sole or main reason for protecting due process is that it tends to improve the quality of decisionmaking and the accuracy of outcomes.40 Whichever view is taken of the purpose of the rights, it cannot be sensibly denied that at least one effect of dueprocess rights is to respect the dignity of the people involved in the litigation.

Dignity in constitutional law

Human dignity is given a significant role in some constitutional bills of rights. In particular, it is a common feature of new constitutions in states which are trying to shake off a legacy of disregard for the human dignity of some, at least, of its citizens. It thus figures significantly in the German Grundgesetz , where Article 1 provides: “(1) The dignity of man shall be inviolable. To respect and *697 protect it shall be the duty of all state authority”. In private law, this was used by the Bundesgerichthof to develop a right to personality, aided by Article 2(1) (“Everyone shall have the right to the free development of his personality in so far as he does not violate the rights of others or offend against the constitutional order or against morality”) in the Schacht case41 (a process which was subsequently approved by the Bundesverfassungsgericht in the Soraya case42 ) and, arising out of that, a right of privacy.

Human dignity has also been an important influence on the post-apartheid constitutions of South Africa. Article 1(a) of the 1996 Constitution identifies human dignity as one of the values on which the sovereign democratic state of South Africa is founded. Article 7(1) proclaims that the Bill of Rights, forming Chapter 2 of the Constitution, “affirms the democratic values of dignity, equality and freedom”. Article 10 states, “Every person has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and protected”. This right is nonderogable: Article 37(5), Table. Dignity also forms an important value in interpreting both the Bill of Rights and other legislation, and for developing common and customary law: Article 39(1), (2). In this setting, emphasising dignity serves to concentrate attention on the importance of ensuring that some people are not treated as less than human or as inferior to others.

However, as pointed out earlier, there are several different sorts of dignity. Each one takes its meaning from particular cultural assumptions about the hallmarks of the virtuous human being. It is therefore wise to treat it with caution. Allowing a right to dignity in a justiciable constitution invites judges to give it a content reflecting their preferred values. This raises two linked problems. First, the legitimacy of judicial action on the basis of a notion as malleable as dignity is not self-evident. Such activism is not necessarily bad in itself, although it is harder to justify in an uncodified constitution than in one which has received popular approval after full discussion and wide consultation, as in the case of the Constitution of South Africa. We should however recognise that developing a right to dignity would invite judicial legislation in a field where (unlike the Convention rights under the Human Rights Act 1998) the Strasbourg jurisprudence and other international legal authorities would offer little guidance. Secondly, because it is indeterminate, the notion of dignity can be used in ways which restrict autonomy and respect as easily as it can be used to uphold them. The notion of dignity can easily become a screen behind which paternalism or moralism are elevated above freedom in legal decision-making. We can examine these problems in turn.

Justifying judicial law-making on the basis of human dignity

It is (relatively) unobjectionable to use human dignity to help judges to interpret express human-rights guarantees in constitutions which can credibly be said to include a commitment to human dignity among their foundations. It is no more (but no less) difficult to justify judicial interpretation of express human-rights guarantees by reference to dignity than it is to justify judicial *698 interpretation of constitutions in general. However, it is more difficult to justify using the notion of dignity as a basis for fashioning new rights which have not been included in the constitutional human-rights canon. Let us imagine, for example, the potential impact of active judicial development of the rights contained in Israel's Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty of 1992, as amended in 1994. The relevant provisions, translated from the Hebrew, run as follows:

1. Fundamental human rights in Israel are founded upon recognition of the value of the human being, the sanctity of human life, and the principle that all persons are free; these rights shall be upheld in the spirit of the principles set forth in the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel.

1a. The purpose of this Basic Law is to protect human dignity and liberty, in order to establish in a Basic Law the values of the State of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state.

2. There shall be no violation of the life, body or dignity of any person as such …

4. All persons are entitled to protection of their life, body and dignity

8. There shall be no violation of rights under this Basic Law except by a law befitting the values of the State of Israel, enacted for a proper purpose, and to an extent no greater than is required or by regulation enacted by virtue of express authorisation in such law.

Not only does the Basic Law treat protecting dignity as its purpose, but it also provides a negative right to be free of violation of one's dignity under section 2 and a positive right to protection of people's dignity in section 8. This is extremely unusual in constitutional documents, and rightly so: as argued above, the notion of a right to protection of dignity is so lacking in substantial and determinate content as to be unhelpful as a guide to judicial decision-making. This is particularly significant in a constitutional document such as the Basic Law, which (despite including dignity) lacks a number of rights commonly included in constitutional documents. The Basic Law contains no right to freedom of expression, religious practice, or association. A court determined to remedy these omissions might use the positive and negative rights relating to dignity under the Basic Law to impose on the State a duty to respect (say) freedom of expression by holding it to be an emanation of the right to dignity, which has the advantage for this purpose of being sufficiently indeterminate to permit this sort of expansive interpretation. It is by no means clear that this would be acceptable in terms of the constitutional authority of the court, even if it were to be regarded by the general public in Israel as being a desirable addition to the calendar of rights in the Basic Law.

Such an expansive use of dignity highlights the dangers of allowing it to be used at all, whether as a right or as a value from which rights may be developed. It is a notion which is culturally dependent and eminently malleable. The pursuit of dignity as a fundamental right sets us on a path where the only guidance is provided by comparative, rather than international, law. While comparative study may appear to offer insights and pointers, we need to be *699 aware of the pit-falls which will beset our journey if we use German, Hungarian or South African experiences to illuminate a condition which may prove to have not just one, but several different, characteristics under the cultures of the various constituent parts of pluralist countries like Israel or the United Kingdom. Even as a background value guiding constitutional and legal development, rather than a right in itself, dignity may be highly controversial and simply shift the terminology in which disputes are conducted rather than resolving them. It is highly unlikely that the landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in Roe v. Wade 43 would have been less controversial had the reasoning of the majority supporting a woman's constitutional freedom to have an abortion been framed in terms of the mother's human dignity rather than a right to privacy. In fact, the notion of human dignity would have made the case even more difficult, since its broadest formulation, the inherent dignity of the whole human race and every member of it, could have required the court to balance the dignity of the unborn child against that of the mother. As the Bundersverfassungsgericht has held under the German Grundgesetz , once human dignity in this broad sense is accepted as a legal value it is hard, if not impossible, to ignore the claim of the foetus to have its interests respected.44 This claim of the foetus does not necessarily trump the claim of the mother in a case where their interests conflict, but it means that the English approach, which denies legal personality to an unborn child and (subject to statute) gives primacy to the interests of the mother over those of the foetus, might need to change significantly, with uncertain results, if human dignity in the broad sense became central to English judicial decision-making.

The uneasy relationship between dignity and paternalism

When a legal structure based on liberal values (particularly moral and economic autonomy, physical and moral integrity, and security of person and property) adopts a new value, its impact may in different ways both enhance and constrain liberalism. Dignity became a legal value in the context of broadly liberal human-rights instruments in international law, so one would expect it to be entirely compatible with liberal values. Curiously, dignity has been used in some jurisdictions in ways which both advance social rights and permit paternalistic restrictions on individual autonomy. Perhaps its role in developing social rights should not surprise us, since fundamental personal and political rights are necessarily underpinned by collective as well as individual goods.45 For example, in France, when a law amending the arrangements for providing and paying for public housing for homeless people was referred to the Conseil constitutionnel for its constitutionality to be determined, the Conseil decided that, in view of the statement of the importance of protecting the dignity of the *700 human person against all forms of degradation, in the preamble to the 1946 Constitution, it was open to the legislature to make appropriate provision for the State to provide decent housing for homeless people as well as winter shelter for travellers.46 As Dr Benoît Jorion observed in his annotation of this diversité de l'habitat decision,47 this took the notion of human dignity well away from the historical sense in which it was used in the 1946 Constitution (subsequently superseded by the 1958 Constitution), where it related to the immediate post-war concern with Nazi atrocities, and allowed all social rights to be grouped under it. Jorion noted that the legislature would necessarily enjoy a wide margin of discretion in deciding how best to give effect to such a right in what must inevitably be a progressive and programmatic rather than immediate and absolute way.48 Nevertheless, by recognising that the concept of human dignity could be used to guide the legislature and the government, and could justify appropriate legislative action (although no tribunal could compel it), the Conseil constitutionnel established that protecting human dignity as an ideal in French constitutional law involved a positive duty to take social action to provide the conditions in which dignity could flourish as much as a duty to protect individuals against assaults on their human dignity.

Dignity as an instrument of legal paternalism--the use of law by the State to impose on individuals its own view of the good life in preference to theirs--was less easily predictable, but in retrospect is comprehensible. Classical liberal notions such as autonomy depend on the State respecting the right of individuals to choose both the desirable ends of their own lives and (within certain limits) the means by which they pursue those ends. The presence of dignity, by contrast, as explained earlier, is determined objectively, at least in part. A government, court or tribunal concerned with dignity need not defer to the subjective judgment of an individual as to what is good for him or her. Instead, it is open to public authorities to make their own assessments of the demands of dignity and the kinds of existence or activity which are conducive to it. If dignity is a fundamental constitutional value, it will then be constitutionally permissible to interfere with people's freedoms in order to preserve what the decision-maker regards as their dignity. This is paternalistic: freedom is limited because it is thought to be good for people's dignity (objectively assessed), and dignity is deemed to be good for everyone, whether or not they share the State's model of dignity or want it imposed on them.

Two more examples from France illustrate this. In the first case, Mme X … , a Jehovah's Witness sought compensation for the moral injury which she had suffered when doctors had administered a blood transfusion to her, without her consent, when she suffered a haemorrhage following surgery. The Cour administrative d'appel de Paris noted that doctors had two obligations which, in this case, conflicted: the duty to respect the patient's right to physical integrity, and the duty to protect the health and, in the last resort, the life of the patient. *701 The court decided that the treatment, which had been clinically appropriate to the patient's condition and had been administered with the object of preserving her health, did not constitute a violation of her rights under Articles 3, 5 or 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights. It is questionable to decide whether or not treatment is degrading by reference to the object of the person administering it rather than the effect on the recipient. But leaving this point aside, the court seems to have considered that the preservation of life is a fundamental aspect of ordre public , to which the right to physical integrity must give way. Although the court did not mention human dignity, the commissaire du gouvernement had argued that the dignity of humanity was capable of limiting autonomy: in a sense, being a member of the human race carries with it the liability to have one's claims sometimes judged according to standards applicable to humanity as a whole, rather than one's own preferences.49

In the second case the Conseil d'Etat , reversing judgments of the Tribunaux administratifs of Versailles and Marseilles, upheld orders by the mayors and police of Morsang-sur-Orges and Aix-en-Provence banning dwarf-throwing competitions (“lancer des nains ”) in their areas. The spectacles were organised by Fun Productions, a company which employed a dwarf, Manuel Wackenheim, as the projectile to be thrown by hopeful contestants. Mr Wackenheim was willing to undertake the task, which he saw as a source of financial security and even fame in a world where many careers (including policing) were barred to him because of his size. His employers ensured that he had proper protective clothing and that appropriate precautions were taken to protect his health. Such displays were controversial in France, although (according to the commissaire du gouvernement , M. Patrick Frydman) they were common in Anglo-Saxon countries, especially Australia, and had been seen in France for 90 years.50 The Conseil d'Etat held that, notwithstanding Mr Wackenheim's keenness to take part and his rights and those of the company to freedom of occupation, of commerce and of industry, it had been justifiable to ban the events (and indeed to fine Fun Productions for organising them). The Conseil d'Etat decided that it was an affront to human dignity to put on a spectacle devoted to allowing spectators to throw a person selected by reason of his suffering from a physical handicap, and that the police had power to stop such spectacles to protect the security of the dwarf and of spectators.51 This puts human dignity, approached at the levels of the group (people with a growth handicap) and the species above the freedom of an individual member of the group to choose how to exploit his or her physical form.

*702 One effect of the decisions is to enable public authorities in France to prevent dwarves like Mr Wackenheim from engaging in their chosen occupation. One of the reasons for doing so is to protect the dignity of the human person. Public authorities can give substance to the notion of an affront to human dignity, feeding into it their own values, subject to review by administrative tribunals in the light of the tribunals' own conception of what constitutes the dignity of the human person. On the basis of that conception, public authorities can lawfully interfere with personal autonomy and freedom of choice in order to protect participants in and spectators of dwarf-throwing, as well as outsiders, from the moral as well as the physical harms which are deemed to flow from that form of affront to human dignity. This paternalistic approach is allied to (although not the same as) a form of legal moralism which treats autonomy as an aspect of human dignity but one which can be overridden by reference to the need to maintain respect for the dignity of whole human societies and the human race. As in the conclusions of the commissaire du gouvernement in the case of Mme X. , above, human dignity becomes a ground for interfering with human autonomy, achieving results which are more compatible with a collectivist view of liberalism than with an individualist one.52


1. See R. v. Director of Public Prosecutions, ex p. Kebilene [1999] 3 W.L.R. 175, DC, currently under appeal to the House of Lords.
2. See David Feldman, “The Human Rights Act 1998 and constitutional principles” (1999) 19 Legal Studies 165-206.
3. [1999] 2 W.L.R. 827 at 844, H.L.
4. [1999] 2 W.L.R. 827 at 905.
5. [1999] 2 W.L.R. 1015, H.L.
6. Conseil constitutionnel, décision de 27 juillet 1994, nos. 94-343-344, DC: relative au respect du corps humain et à l'utilisation des éléments et produits du corps human, à l'assistance médicale à la procréation et au diagnostique prénatal (lois no. 94-653 and no. 94-654 du 29 juillet 1994), Dalloz, 1995 jurisprudence, p. 237; Dalloz, 1995 sommaire, p. 299.
7. Peter Birks, Harassment and Hubris: The Right to an Equality of Respect (Dublin, Faculty of Law, University College Dublin, 1996).
8. These characteristics can be seen in unpleasant as well as pleasant people. The eponymous anti-hero of Da Ponte and Mozart's Don Giovanni ultimately displays a good measure of them, alongside less attractive personality traits. It is this which makes it possible to some degree to respect the Don, making his life and death both dramatically satisfying and tragic.
9. The boundaries of the common moral universe are a matter for debate. For example, some would argue that animals have a right to dignity in the objective sense. For the purposes of this paper, I am limiting attention to human dignity, begging the important but, for present purposes, irrelevant issue of the relationship between human dignity and other kinds of dignity.
10. Oxford English Dictionary, (2nd ed., Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989), Vol. IV, p. 656, tit. “dignity”, sense 1.
11. ibid. tit. “dignified”, sense 3.
12. Alasdair Macintyre, After Virtue: a study in moral theory (2nd ed. London, Duckworth, 1985), esp. Chap. 16.
13. Birks, op. cit., n. 7 above.
14. [1996] 4 All E.R. 1008 at 1020, C.A.
15. Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland [1993] A.C. 789, H.L.
16. Report No. 38/96 of October 15, 1996, Case 10,506 X v. Argentina, (1999) 6 B.H.C.R. 314 paras 93-94. I am grateful to my colleague Jeremy McBride for drawing this case to my attention.
17. Report of November 5, 1969, Yearbook of the European Convention on Human Rights, Vol. XII (1969), at p. 186.
18. P. van Dijk and G. J. H. van Hoof, Theory and Practice of the European Convention on Human Rights, 3rd ed. (The Hague, Kluwer, 1998), p. 310 (emphasis in original).
19. See, e.g. Tyrer v. United Kingdom, Eur. Ct. H.R., Judgment of April 25, 1978, Series A, No. 26, at p. 15; Costello-Roberts v. United Kingdom, Eur. Ct. H.R., Judgment of March 25, 1993, Series A, No. 247-C; A v. United Kingdom, Eur. Ct. H.R., Judgment of September 23, 1998.
20. East African Asians Case, Eur. Commn. H.R., Report of December 14, 1973, (1994) 78-A D.R. 5.
21. Eur. Commn. H.R., Report of September 6, 1990, Series A, No. 232-C (which also contains the Judgment of the Court), at pp. 87-88.
22. Eur. Ct. H.R., Judgment of April 25, 1978, Series A, No. 26.
23. Eur. Ct. H.R., Judgment of May 28, 1985, Series A, no. 94, at p. 42.
24. Eur. Commn. H.R., Report of December 14, 1973, (1994) 78-A D.R. 5.
25. (1997) 25 E.H.R.R. 251.
26. R. v. R. [1992] 1 A.C. 599, HL.
27. Judgment of November 22, 1995, Series A, No. 335-B.
28. ibid. para. 43 of the Judgment.
29. ibid. at para. 44 of the Judgment. The year before this judgment was delivered, Parliament had further extended the scope of the offence of rape by creating a specific offence of male rape in the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994.
30. Series A, No. 244 at p. 48.
31. Judgment of September 24, 1992, Series A, No. 244.
32. Judgment of December 4, 1995, Series A, No. 336, at p. 26.
33. X and Y v. Netherlands , Judgment of March 26, 1985, Series A, No. 91; Costello-Roberts v. United Kingdom , Judgment of March 25, 1993, Series A, No. 247-C. The Inter-American Commission of Human Rights has held that similar positive obligations may arise under the right to respect for dignity in Article 11 of the American Convention on Human Rights: Report No. 38/96 of October 15, 1996, Case 10,506 v. Argentina , para. 93.
34. Judgment of March 25, 1993, Series A, No. 247-C.
35. See, e.g. Halford v. United Kingdom , Eur. Ct. H.R., Judgment of June 25, 1997, 24 E.H.R.R. 523.
36. Marckx v. Belgium , Judgment of June 13, 1979, Series A, No. 31.
37. Judgment of March 25, 1992, Series A, No. 232-C.
38. Judgment of July 30, 1998, para. 60.
39. On this, see X, Y and Z v. United Kingdom , Judgment of April 22, 1997, Reports 1997-II, especially at p. 635, para. 52.
40. See the discussion in Denis Galligan, Due Process and Fair Procedures (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1996), Chap. 4.
41. BGH May 25, 1954, BGHZ 13, 334.
42. BVerfGE 34, 269 (1973).
43. 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
44. BVerfGE 37, 324 (1975), holding void that part of an Act of the Bundestag of 1974 allowing abortion in the first twelve weeks of pregnancy without any requirement of necessity being shown.
45. See the discussions in David Feldman, “Privacy-related Rights and their Social Value”, in Peter Birks (ed.), Privacy and Loyalty (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1997), pp. 15-50, and id. , “Content Neutrality”, Ian Loveland (ed.), Importing the First Amendment: Freedom of Speech and Expression in Britain, Europe and the USA (Oxford, Hart Publishing, 1998), pp. 139-171.
46. Conseil constitutionnel, décision no. 94-359, D.C.: loi relative à la diversité de l'habitat, 19 janvier 1995, Actualité juridique de droit administratif, 1995, p. 455.
47. ibid. at p. 457.
48. ibid. at 19.
49. C.A.A. Paris, form. plén., 9 juin 1998 (Mme X … ), Dalloz Jurisprudence, 1999, p. 277, note by Dr Gilles Pellissier at 281, citing, inter alia , B. Edelman, “La dignité humaine, un concept nouveau”, Dalloz Chron., 1997, p. 185.
50. For the conclusions of the commissaire du gouvernement before the Conseil d'Etat , see “L'atteinte à la dignité de la personne humaine et les pouvoirs de police municipale, à propos des ‘lancers de nains’: conclusions sur Conseil d'État, Assemblée, 27 octobre 1995 (2 espèces)”, RFD adm. 11(6), nov.-déc. 1995, 1204-1215, esp. at 1204, 1207-1210.
51. CE, ass., 27 oct. 1995, Cne de Morsang-sur-Orge , Dalloz Jur. 1995, p. 257; C.E., ass., 27 oct. 1995, Ville d'Aix-en-Provence, Rec. C.E. , p. 372; Dalloz Jur., 1996, p. 177, with annotation by G. Leberton.
52. This is a revised version of a paper originally presented at the Fourth Anglo-Israeli Judicial Exchange, held at University College London and the Middle Temple in April 1999 on Fundamental Rights in Unwritten Constitutions. Among the participants and others who made helpful comments on and criticisms of the paper, I owe a special debt to Chief Justice Barak for his thought-provokingly robust critique, to Professor Dawn Oliver for her valuable suggestions for improvement, and to my colleague Dr Catherine Dupré, an expert on the constitutional treatment of human dignity, who made illuminating comments on a revised draft, raising a number of additional issues for discussion and introducing me to the instructive examples in the French constitutional caselaw. Remaining errors, omissions and eccentricities are my own.Article to be continued in next issue.


END OF DOCUMENT
(c) 2013 Thomson Reuters.