P.L. 2000, Spr, 61-76

Public Law

2000

# Human dignity as a legal value: Part 2

David Feldman

© 2013 Sweet & Maxwell and its Contributors

Subject: Human rights

Keywords: Human rights

*61 Indirect protection of dignity in English law

Although human dignity is increasingly significant in the constitutional settings examined in the previous section, it does not yet have a developed role in the constitution of the United Kingdom. Although Dawn Oliver has suggested that it is one of the values underlying both public and private law in the United Kingdom, together with autonomy, respect, status, and security,1 the constitutional significance of dignity seems less fundamental in practice than, for example, effectiveness of government, accountability and representativeness (around which are designed the institutions of parliamentary democracy). Even among the values which Dawn Oliver identifies, dignity would appear, from its concrete effects in law, to rank below autonomy and security, on which legal institutions such as property are founded.

Perhaps this should not disappoint us too much, bearing in mind the multiple meanings of human dignity and the difficulties, as well as the advantages, to which this can give rise. Where English law protects dignity, it does so indirectly. This section considers the main ways which it does so, being conscious of the fact that the Human Rights Act 1998, the main provisions of which will come into force on October 2, 2000, may affect the approach to the protection of dignity in national law very significantly. It will be convenient to consider the approach of English law in relation to a number of particular problems which seem to raise serious issues about dignity. In each area we have to take account of private as well as public law, criminal law as well as civil law, common law as well as statute law.

As a general matter, the law recognises that dignity is an important value which may generate duties on public authorities to provide assistance to those who would otherwise be left destitute. This gives rise to something in the nature of a social or economic right, which extends at least as far as is necessary to maintain life and a minimum level of dignity. It may also lead to the development of principles and remedies in public law. As Simon Brown L.J. *62 pointed out in R. v. Secretary of State for Social Security, ex p. Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, 2 this is essential if other rights which people have are to be given reality. Where regulations purported to withdraw benefits from people wishing to exercise their right to seek asylum in the United Kingdom, his Lordship held that the regulations would either render the right nugatory by making it impossible for asylum-seekers to remain in the United Kingdom, or “necessarily contemplate for some a life so destitute that no civilised nation can tolerate it”. The latter would violate a common-law obligation to maintain poor immigrants stated by Lord Ellenborough C.J. as early as 1803: “the law of humanity, which is anterior to all positive laws, obliges us to afford them relief, to save them from starving”.3 There is a clear analogy between this and the approach of the French Conseil constitutionnel in its Diversité de l'habitat decision4 : respect for human dignity may require the state to take positive action to assist those who are unable to provide for themselves. The Court of Appeal in ex parte Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants held that only clear words in an Act of Parliament could authorise the making of regulations which would have the effect of violating that obligation or depriving people of the opportunity to exercise their statutory right to seek asylum. The link to dignity is clear. (Unfortunately Parliament promptly legislated in clear words to permit the regulations to be made.)

Specific provisions protecting dignity as such

Like the European Convention on Human Rights, but unlike the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and German or Israeli constitutional law, English law does not have a cause of action which specifically protects human dignity or honour in general, although it does offer protection to reputation. There are particular provisions protecting the dignity of those performing specific tasks, where it is the dignity of the task which is protected rather than the dignity of the individual. For example, the common law offence of scandalising the court (in Scotland, murmuring the judge) and some forms of contempt in the face of the court are designed to protect the dignity of the legal process. It is also an offence to commit riotous, violent or indecent behaviour in places of worship,5 or to use force to prevent a minister from celebrating divine service.6 But ordinary people's ordinary dignity is not explicitly and directly protected by law. Nevertheless, the protection of other interests can be seen to offer incidental protection to dignity in a number of respects.

Victims of persecution

We have already seen that the law imposes stiff hurdles (which Parliament has shown itself willing to tackle) in authorising the making of subordinate *63 legislation which prevents asylum-seekers from maintaining themselves. There is also increasing evidence that our highest court, the House of Lords, is prepared to apply a particularly generous approach when interpreting the term “social group” in the phrase “well-founded fear of being persecuted for … membership of a particular social group” in Article 1A(2) of the UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, to ensure that people are not returned to a regime in which they are liable to be systematically discriminated against while the state turns a blind eye. In Islam v. Secretary of State for the Home Department; R. v. Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex p. Shah, 7 it was held by a majority in the House of Lords (Lords Steyn, Hoffmann, Hope and Hutton; Lord Millett dissenting) that, while a “social group” within the meaning of the Convention had to be identifiable by reference to some common characteristics apart from being subject to persecution, women in Pakistan who were subject to discrimination in respect of their human rights, or more narrowly (per Lord Hutton) married women in Pakistan who are liable to be subject to proceedings for adultery, and who in either case lack state support in the face of discrimination, form a “social group” for this purpose. The majority rejected any need for there to be some association between members of the group apart from their common liability to persecution. The contrary view as formulated by LaForest J. in the Canadian Supreme Court in Attorney-General of Canada v. Ward 8 includes among social groups only (a) those defined by innate and unchangeable characteristics, (b) those “whose members voluntarily associate for reasons so fundamental to their human dignity that they should not be forced to forsake the association”, and (c) those associated by former voluntary status which is unalterable because of its historical permanence. Lord Millett in his dissent preferred the approach of LaForest J. to that of the majority of the House of Lords on the ground that, if a group was entitled to the protection of the Refugee Convention while lacking any coherence apart from the common characteristics which give rise to discrimination against them, the idea of a “social group” would be indistinguishable from any group subject to persecution, and the scope of the Convention (and with it the obligations of receiving states) would be thrown open without obvious limitations. Lord Millett's view is, with respect, persuasive. This makes it all the more remarkable that the majority was prepared to depart from an inter-pretation of the obligations of receiving states under the Convention which had received considerable judicial support internationally and was more easily sustainable on the basis of the text of the Convention. They extended refugee status to an indefinite number of Pakistani women who had nothing in common except the threat to their security, equality of respect and dignity. The decision of the majority indicates that judges are increasingly sensitive to the rights of many groups and to the values which underpin them, which is a welcome development even if it may lead to results in asylum cases which almost certainly go beyond the intentions of the drafters of the refugee convention.

*64 Victims of harassment

Without relying on a right to privacy as such, English law has developed remedies to allow judicial control of harassment. The most important case at common law is Burris v. Azadani, 9 holding that a woman who was suing for an order restraining a man from harassing her could obtain an interim injunction to protect her until such time as the substantive claim was heard. Since there is House of Lords authority for the proposition that one cannot obtain an interim injunction unless one is trying to protect an interest interference with which confers a substantive cause of action, it can be deduced that the court would have been prepared to hold that there is a substantive private-law right not to be harassed. Because the complaints in this and other cases of the same type related to stalking in public places, it can be said that the interests protected by this cause of action include dignity (in the sense of one's standing in the eyes of observers) as well as the more obvious interest in one's bodily integrity and security. The decision was of value to the legal advisers to the late Diana, Princess of Wales, when she was being stalked by a German doctor whom a court ordered in June 1996 not to go within five miles of her, and when she was being pursued by a self-styled press photographer and former motorcycle dispatch rider, Martin Stenning, who was restrained in August 1996 from approaching within 300 yards of her, communicating with her, harassing her or interfering with her safety, security or wellbeing, or molesting or assaulting her.10

In another move, the criminal law of assault has been extended by judicial interpretation of old legislation. Where harassment by telephone calls causes people to fear immediate and unlawful violence, and leads to psychiatric injury, it was held in R. v. Ireland 11 to be capable of amounting to assault occasioning actual bodily harm or grievous bodily harm under sections 18, 20 and 47 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861, although humiliation on its own would not suffice. Nor, as Hobhouse L.J. held in R. v. Chan-Fook 12 in a passage approved by the House of Lords in R. v. Ireland, does it include “mere emotions such as fear or distress or panic nor does it include, as such, states of mind that are not themselves evidence of some identifiable clinical condition”. The protection for dignity here is, therefore, derived incidentally and indirectly from legal protection for the interests in bodily integrity, moral integrity, and security. There has also been fresh action by Parliament, enacting offences of intentionally or unintentionally causing harassment, alarm or distress in public places,13 various offences of public disorder under the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, and the anti-social behaviour orders under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (all of which, however, have the capacity to be used against political demonstrators and industrial pickets as much as stalkers).

*65 Treatment of those in custody in ways which respect their dignity

The Prisons Act 1952, the Prison Rules 1964 and the common law do not generally impose duties on prison authorities in respect of conditions under which prisoners are confined and the regimes to which they are subject. As the House of Lords held in R. v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, ex p. Hague, 14 prison authorities owe a duty of care towards those whom they incarcerate, but the duty is to avoid imposing on them conditions which do them foreseeable mental or physical harm rather than to uphold standards of human dignity. Their Lordships held that a prisoner may bring an action for false imprisonment against a person who limits the prisoner's freedom of movement more closely than has been authorised by lawful decisions, but this was thought to apply mainly to action by other prisoners and was not seen as a remedy for poor conditions of imprisonment. It is true that in Toumia v. Evans 15 the Court of Appeal refused to strike out a claim by a prisoner for false imprisonment and misfeasance in a public office flowing from the plaintiff's cell not being unlocked as usual as a result of industrial action by prison officers, but this is by no means authority for the proposition that unusually long periods of confinement in a cell amounted to a tort, or that any such cause of action would protect the dignity of the prisoner rather than his or her autonomy, physical integrity or security.

Prisoners retain most common law rights except so far as they are necessarily curtailed by the nature of imprisonment or they are removed with the authority of clear words in a statute.16 For example, female prisoners have the right to competent obstetric care.17 So far as dignity is concerned, it falls mainly to H.M. Chief Inspector of Prisons, ad hoc inquiries such as that of Lord Woolf into the Strangeways Prison riot and related disturbances in 1990, and the Committee established under the European Convention on the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,18 to monitor the position, and the Home Office and the Prisons Agency to correct abuses. The record is not a good one, although there is no doubt that improvements have been made since 1990. There is a risk that findings by the C.P.T. of inhuman or degrading treatment of prisoners by reason of prison conditions under the Torture Convention might ultimately lead to findings by the European Court of Human Rights and/or our courts under the Human Rights Act 1998 that conditions in some penal establishments violate Article 3. It will be interesting to see whether prisoners start to bring civil actions against the Home Office and/or the Prisons Agency and/or the governors of individual establishments under section 7 of the 1998 Act, in effect for breach *66 of the statutory duty imposed by section 6(1) of the Act to comply with Convention rights.

The law has had limited value in ensuring that prisoners are able to participate in the process leading to decisions affecting them. The reviewability of disciplinary decisions was established in the 1980s. The battleground in the 1990s has mainly revolved round decisions about releasing prisoners on licence, and the role of the executive in setting tariff periods for life-sentence prisoners. Some procedural requirements have been established.19 However, it remains too easy for a life-sentence prisoner to have his or her expected term of imprisonment before release on licence increased in response to public pressure and other circumstances over which the prisoner has no control. The discretionary nature of such decisions is being increased by legislation such as the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. This threatens the respect for human dignity to which even life-sentence prisoners are entitled, by treating them as having no entitlement to contemplate the possibility of a life beyond confinement or of an end to the period of retributive detention. Although members of the Court of Appeal said in R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Hindley 20 that it would be preferable for even a whole-life tariff to be set in terms of a number of years rather than by reference to the life of the prisoner (because of the arbitrariness of the latter), only Lord Woolf M.R. was prepared to say that a tariff set by reference to the term of a prisoner's life would be open to challenge as a matter of law. To settle decisions about the term which a prisoner is to serve behind closed doors, without even a guarantee that a determinate period will be set as necessary to fulfil the retributive element of the sentence, does not treat the prisoner seriously as a person entitled to some degree of certainty about the period of incarceration to be imposed on him or her for particular purposes.

Children in the criminal justice system are normally dealt with in a fashion which gives appropriate weight to their human dignity. The United Kingdom has, however, recently been held by the European Court of Human Rights to be in violation of Article 6 of the ECHR in respect of the trial of two young boys for murder in an adult court, where the conditions made it particularly unlikely that the children would understand the proceedings or be able adequately to instruct their legal teams.21

In relation to children in care, the Children Act 1989 generally insists that the children's best interests should be the paramount consideration. Although the difficulties which surround such decisions are immense, there seems generally to be a reasonable level of respect for the dignity of children. Corporal punishment has been formally abolished in children's homes,22 although recent revelations of wide-spread physical and sexual abuse of *67 children in some children's homes raise question-marks over the adequacy of the administrative systems for monitoring how children are treated when in care. Such treatment by local authority staff would certainly give rise to actions for violations of Article 3 rights occurring after the Human Rights Act 1998 comes into force. Medical treatment raises separate issues which will be addressed below.

Corporal punishment

Most of the matters which gave rise to findings that the United Kingdom had violated Article 3 of the ECHR have now been resolved. Judicial corporal punishment is no longer authorised anywhere in the United Kingdom (including the Isle of Man). Lawful corporal punishment in schools and children's homes has disappeared (the right to beat previously retained by some independent schools having been abolished when School Standards and Framework Act 1998, section 131 came into force).23 The gradual normalisation of the security position in Northern Ireland should ensure that systematic abuse of terrorist suspects will no longer be part of the armoury of the security forces there. The main remaining area of concern relates to the law governing corporal punishment of children by their parents and guardians. The European Court of Human Rights held in A. v. United Kingdom 24 that the state had failed adequately to protect a child against infringement of the interests protected by Article 3 where a man with parental responsibilities beat a child repeatedly with a garden cane but was acquitted in criminal proceedings of assault occasioning actual bodily harm because of the “reasonable chastisement” defence. The operation of this defence will have to be rethought, either by the courts or by Parliament, in the light of the 1998 Act.

Medical treatment

Several matters relating to medical treatment, particularly for mental conditions, need to be addressed. The general position in English law is that administering medical treatment is a battery unless the patient has consented to it. This was recently reaffirmed by the Court of Appeal in St. George's Healthcare N.H.S. Trust v. S. 25 Instructions given by a mental patient to medical staff during a lucid period must normally be complied with if a physical illness occurs during a period when the patient is mentally incapable of making decisions.26 In principle, the right to be free of non-consensual treatment applies to prisoners on hunger strike who are of sound mind.27 Similarly, detaining someone for treatment is false imprisonment unless the person has consented. The principle requiring a patient's consent to treatment most obviously protects the interests in autonomy and physical integrity, but it also protects a patient's dignity. Being subjected to treatment, especially invasive *68 treatment, without one's consent is calculated to threaten one's sense of one's own worth and the feeling of being valued by others. How valuable can a person be, one might ask, if others are prepared to do things to him which remove from him any control over his own destiny? What could be less compatible with one's dignity than being treated as a person to whom such a thing might be done lawfully and properly?

At this point, however, we once again run into the multi-faceted nature of human dignity. While the approach suggested here is straightforward if one looks at dignity only at the individual level, it becomes much less clear if one approaches these problems at the level of the dignity of the species. Is it compatible with the dignity of the species to allow people to die unnecessarily? Not, perhaps, if one regards dignity as reflected in special sanctity for human life. Concern for the dignity of the species can support a view of human dignity which makes it improper to allow people to surrender their own lives or those of others if they can be saved. This leads to a dignity-based principle which allows (but does not necessarily compel) doctors to ignore the sane and conscientious decisions of patients to refuse treatment in at least some cases where the result would be to endanger life, as the conclusions of the commissaire du gouvernement and the decision of the Cour administrative d'appel de Paris in the Mme. X … case demonstrate.28

Perhaps this is implicit in the various limitations which English law places on the principle which requires consent to treatment. Most of the restrictions are based on a combination of a wide definition of “medical treatment” as including feeding, and a doctrine of necessity which allows medical staff to act in what they conceive to be the best interests of patients who are regarded as incompetent to make decisions about their own treatment. Thus compulsorily detained mental patients who refuse food can be force-fed, as this constitutes medical treatment within the meaning of section 63 of the Mental Health Act 1983.29 Children and young persons, even those who are normally entitled to consent to medical treatment (as to which see Family Law Reform Act 1969, s.8, and Re W (A Minor) (Medical Treatment: Court's Jurisdiction) 30 ) are liable to be regarded as incompetent if they refuse treatment which doctors consider to be in their best interests, leading courts to override the refusal.31 There are often good reasons for doing this, but it denies the child (who may in all other respects be Gillick -competent) the right to influence decisions which are being made about his or her welfare. When viewed from the perspective of the dignity of the individual human person, this is an affront to a person's dignity, even if the person is a child. It also infringes the child's right to have his or her opinions given due weight in making decisions on matters affecting the child, under Article 12(1) of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. If ignoring the child's wishes leads to forced treatment it may also infringe the child's right to physical integrity and security, as well as being a *69 more serious infringement of the child's dignity. On the other hand, preserving the life of a child may uphold the dignity of the human species and of human life in a way that respecting the individual child's dignity, by abiding by his or her decision to refuse treatment, never could.

In relation to children or adults who are not competent to make their own decisions about treatment, the courts have developed a power to grant declarations that invasive surgery, including sterilisation operations which are not medically necessary, would not constitute battery if deemed to be in the patients' best interests.32 It is at least arguable that such declarations do not impinge on the patient's autonomy if his or her mental state is such as to make it unlikely that he or she is capable of making autonomous decisions. Of course, this depends on what one means by “autonomy”. If it is simply an expression of the desirability of people being free from interference by others, even a patient who is entirely incompetent can be said to have an interest in autonomy. On the other hand, if autonomy involves a capacity for the exercise of choice and judgement, a mentally ill patient may (depending on the nature of the illness) suffer from a lack or impairment of autonomy. However, even in such a case non-consensual treatment can be seen as interfering with their dignity, in that the patient may both feel demeaned and be regarded by others as being subject to demeaning domination by the decision-makers, whether medical or judicial.33

The decision in Re F has been taken further in a recent and very worrying decision of the House of Lords. In R. v. Bournewood Community and Mental Health N.H.S. Trust, ex p. L 34 a majority of their Lordships (Lord Steyn dissenting) held that a mental patient, who had been taken to hospital and did not attempt to leave (but did not or could not give consent to treatment), was a voluntary patient and had not been detained, notwithstanding the fact that the doctor on duty would have detained him on medical grounds under the Mental Health Act 1983 had he tried to leave. As a result, the patient was not protected by the regime governing compulsorily detained patients under the Mental Health Act 1983. As the 1983 Act was enacted partly to meet the requirements imposed by the European Court of Human Rights for regular review of detention as demanded by Article 5 of the ECHR, the decision leaves a large number of people who are unable to make decisions for themselves without the protection which Article 5 requires. The decision was apparently dictated by pragmatic rather than principled reasons. Had the containment and treatment of every “voluntary” patient (in this extended sense) been subject to the review of a Mental Health Review Tribunal, the tribunal system would have been swamped, lacking the resources to perform its functions. Nevertheless, despite the resource implications of departing from the decision, this is a matter which is likely to need to be revisited once the Human *70 Rights Act 1998 comes into force, although the resource implications make it desirable for the review to be undertaken by Parliament rather than the judiciary.

Rules about non-consensual treatment or detention for medical conditions thus protect the patient's dignity as well as autonomy. However, the impact of dignity in these cases is not straightforward, because (like the closely related value of respect for the patient as a human being whose worth is equal to that of others, including doctors and judges) dignity may cut two ways, even if one looks at dignity only on the individual level, without the additional complications introduced by looking at the dignity of the human species. Sometimes it may favour treating the patient, as will often be the case where doing so keeps the person alive where he or she is unconscious and unable to make a decision. In other cases dignity may be better served by withdrawing or denying medical treatment, for example where objective observers regard the patient's condition as inherently undignified and consider that it is in his or her best interests to die with a modicum of dignity incompatible with aggressive medical intervention. If one considers that life has an intrinsic dignity which is compromised by any shortening of it, different elements of the notion of dignity may pull in opposite directions in the same case. For instance, courts are sometimes prepared to accept evidence that death is in the best interest of the patient, and in effect authorise death by starvation, even where there is no immediate threat to life from the medical condition which is making the patient dependent on artificial feeding.35 In such cases considerations of dignity are not, and cannot be, one-sided or dispositive. Apart from the intrinsic dignity of life, it is not clear that withdrawing nutrition and allowing patients to die slowly of thirst or starvation is any more conducive to maintaining or enhancing due dignity and respect than allowing them to continue to live without the possibility of improving their physical or mental condition. There are also less dramatic circumstances (although just as traumatic for those involved) where courts accept that it may be better for an incompetent patient to be spared the stress and discomfort of aggressive medical intervention if the medical condition reaches a crisis.36 These too are cases in which autonomy has little, if any, role to play, and the requirements of dignity and the related value of respect give no clear guidance through the moral problem.37

Quite apart from the kind and quality of treatment which a patient receives, the process of allocating resources to different medical specialisms and cases may affect the capacity of individual patients to enjoy a dignified life-style. Issues of resource allocation do not really involve considerations of autonomy (unless a resource-allocation decision is made which fails to take account of the *71 importance of patients' autonomy). Respect and dignity, however, are implicated in resource-allocation. It is important that decision-makers should take proper account of the right of all patients to equal concern and respect, and respecting their needs (which does not necessarily mean meeting those needs out of public funds) tends to enhance their dignity. The quality of a person's life is an issue of human dignity, and will need to be taken into account if human dignity is to be a major value in English law. So far, the law has not required that patients and potential patients should participate in decisions which affect them about the allocation of resources. Courts have been unwilling to intervene in decisions about the allocation or rationing of health care as long as the relevant decision-maker has not acted irrationally. In R. v. Cambridge Health Authority, ex p. B 38 the Court of Appeal overruled a first instance decision of Laws J. in which his Lordship had quashed a health authority's decision not to fund an experimental treatment for a child's leukaemia. The treatment cost about £70,000 and had a low probability of producing a long-term improvement in the girl's condition. Laws J. held that the authority had failed to give adequate weight to the patient's right to life. The Court of Appeal decided that the right to life was only one of a number of relevant considerations, and the authority had not acted unreasonably in balancing the various demands made of it. The right not to be intentionally deprived of life, under Article 2 of the ECHR, may become weightier in cases like Bland and (to a lesser extent) ex p. B once the Human Rights Act 1998 is in force. But quite apart from the right to life, the idea of human dignity should require those who make resource allocation decisions in relation to health care to think of patients holistically and give consideration to resourcing their total care, rather than thinking of them simply in terms of the particular diseases from which they suffer.

Another area in which dignity and rationing of medical provision collide is assisted reproduction. A person's reproductive freedom is guaranteed by Article 12 of the ECHR (freedom to marry and found a family), although this is a right to freedom from interference rather than a right to positive assistance for people who are unable to achieve reproduction naturally. More to the point is Article 8 (the right to respect for private and family life). One might expect that a widow would, under this article, be regarded as having a right to utilise the sperm of her deceased husband, donated for that purpose before his death. However, under the statutory scheme established by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990, the donor's written permission for the use of his sperm for reproduction is required before anyone may use it for that purpose. In R. v. Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, ex p. Blood, 39 Mrs Blood wanted to use the sperm of her deceased husband to conceive a child who would be the child of both of them. Unfortunately, her late husband had not given written consent to the procedure before his death. The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority decided that they could not authorise *72 her use of her husband's sperm, and could not release the sperm to allow her to undergo in vitro fertilisation in another jurisdiction (Belgium) where such a procedure without the donor's written consent would be lawful. The Court of Appeal held that this refusal to release the sperm was unlawful, not as a violation of Article 8 of the ECHR, but as a restriction on freedom of interstate trade within the E.C., since the effect was to prevent Mrs Blood from seeking assistance in her reproductive endeavours elsewhere in the European Community. The sperm was subsequently released, and Mrs Blood was delivered of a baby in 1999. The process of obtaining that result involved a major infringement of her dignity and that of her late husband (as well as their autonomy and privacy), and one can only hope that the position will be improved once Article 8 of the ECHR enters English law as one of the Convention rights under the Human Rights Act 1998. However, the result of importing human dignity into the analysis will not be clear-cut, because (as the French Conseil constitutionnel made clear in the bioethics cases mentioned earlier40 ) Parliament and the courts will have to take account of the dignity of the entire species, including the fate of the foetuses to be engendered by medically assisted conception, and this may lead courts to give more weight to the likely future interests of the unborn (and, at the time of the hearing, unconceived) child and the dignity of the deceased husband than to the wishes of the living widow. The caselaw of the German Bundesverfassungsgericht on the basis of the right to human dignity in the Grundgesetz protects the unborn embryo as well as the rest of humanity.41 Resorting to human dignity changes the terms of the argument, but does not make the decisions much easier.

Publicity and the right to respect for private life

The importance to dignity of respect for private life (as well as autonomy and respect more generally) has already been noted. Generally, English law suffers from having had no developed law of privacy, as discussed in another session. Nor have personality rights been developed in English law, unlike the position in (for example) Germany. Protection for personality and image tends, where it exists at all, to be parasitic on other interests, such as property, or the right to market oneself,42 or breach of confidence, dependent on balancing exercises of the sort commonly undertaken in administrative law, as in Hellewell v. Chief Constable of Derbyshire 43 and R. v. Chief Constable of the North Wales Police, ex p. AB. 44 There are still areas where official or unofficial snooping and surveillance is taking place. At present, some of it is trespassory (as in the case of the camera placed in the sitting room of one of the men suspected of killing Stephen Lawrence) and the subsequent broadcasting of the film by Granada Television on Thursday April 8, 1999 is almost certainly a serious breach of confidence. It will, after the Human Rights Act comes into force, often also be a serious *73 and unjustifiable breach of Article 8 rights if perpetrated by a public authority.45 Even after the Police Act 1997 powers to authorise bugging and burgling begin to bite, the dissemination of the fruits of the investigation on television, calculated to humiliate the suspects, will be an infringement of Article 8(1) which can hardly be justifiable under Article 8(2). However, certain privacy-related rights have been developed in English law. Children in legal proceedings are usually well protected by restraints on publication, although public interests have to be considered46 and (as noted above) this does not apply to murder trials.

Sexuality

Perhaps the most controversial aspects of respect for private life are those which relate to the treatment of sexuality. English law has an ambivalent attitude towards homosexuality. It is legal only within strict limits under Sexual Offences Act 1967, although there is currently a Bill before Parliament which would remove the differential between the ages of consent for heterosexual and homosexual activities. English law remains very censorious about sexual activity outside the heterosexual mainstream, even going so far as to treat as ineffective consent to moderate physical harm given by participants in sadomasochistic encounters,47 so sado-masochism and perhaps some less extreme heterosexual and homosexual practices are automatically illegal, a worrying development in terms of privacy law. However, the European Court of Human Rights has decided that this decision was justifiable under Article 8(2) for the protection of health and morals, and even doubted whether the activities there fell within the scope of required respect for private life.48 In terms of dignity, someone other than a sado-masochist might argue that some sado-masochistic practices are simply incompatible with the dignity of any of the parties. However, when one allies the interest in dignity with that in autonomy on classic, liberal principles, the right of people to make choices about their lifestyles (including their sexual activities), and to identify their notions of the good life for themselves, is of central importance. Certainly in the eyes of sadomasochists themselves their dignity is not at all compromised (or unacceptably compromised) by their submission to or performance of the acts which give them sexual satisfaction. If anything, they are likely to regard their dignity (and their autonomy and self-fulfilment) as having been enhanced. The tension which is created by this conflict between a paternalistic notion of dignity and welfare and a liberal-individualist one can be seen if one compares Brown with R. v. Wilson (Alan), 49 where the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) decided that a man could rely, as a defence to a charge of assault, on his partner's consent to having his initials branded on her buttocks with a hot knife. It *74 would be interesting to know whether the result of Wilson would have been the same had either party admitted to deriving any sexual satisfaction from the procedure. What is clear, at the very least, is that looking at human dignity from an objective standpoint at the individual level, or at the level of the dignity of the species, a legislator may be justified in imposing rigorous controls on human sexuality, whereas looking at dignity from a subjective standpoint at the individual level or at the level of the group (if that group is defined by reference to the sexual predilection of its members) results in support for sexual liberalism.

The tension between these different approaches to questions of dignity and morality helps to explain why the homosexual community is not well protected against official discrimination by public law,50 although a doctrine of equality currently being developed in E.U. law may help both homosexuals and transsexuals.51 In relation to the formation of family relationships, homosexual couples are treated very differently from heterosexual couples, although there are signs of a relaxing judicial attitude towards, for example, adoption by a single member of a homosexual couple under section 15 of the Adoption Act 1976, in Re W (Adoption: Homosexual Adopter), 52 and homosexual couples are now regarded for the purposes of succession to tenancies under the Rent Act 1977 by the courts,53 but apparently not under the Housing Act 1985, section 186, by Parliament, as a family.

The right to be free of discrimination

It is worth noting for present purposes that the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, so far as they are concerned with dignity, are principally directed towards the dignity of individuals rather than of groups, and allow for the assault on an individual's dignity to be compensated by an award of general damages including an element for humiliation and hurt feelings.

Incitement to racial hatred

Incitement to racial hatred is an offence under the Public Order Act 1986, Part III. This goes some way towards upholding the dignity of groups against the worst sort of assault on their right to respect. However, English law does not go as far as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Article 20 (to which the United Kingdom entered a reservation) requires in this respect.

Defamation

It will be clear from the earlier comments on Berkoff v. Burchill 54 that I regard the law of defamation as an unsuitable tool for upholding dignity. The *75 problem, as that case illustrates in an extreme but neat way, is that the tort was developed to deal with reputation. Although the protection of reputation sometimes incidentally protects dignity, it is often dignity of the worst sort: self-importance and pomposity. Because the main focus is on reputation, plenty of flagrant assaults on dignity fall outside the law of defamation,55 while trivial and unworthy assertions of dignity are protected, as in Berkoff v. Burchill. Protection for dignity is not achieved in a worthwhile way by defamation law, which also poses a serious threat to other rights such as freedom of expression.

Conclusion

Human dignity is already an important background value for human-rights law and constitutional development in international law and in a growing number of national jurisdictions. Because it is regarded as important in the caselaw of the European Court of Human Rights, the value is likely to become increasingly significant in the United Kingdom when the Human Rights Act 1998 comes into force. It may need to be taken into account both when interpreting the Convention rights themselves, and when approaching other legislation in compliance with the strong injunction in section 3 of the Act to interpret it so far as possible in a manner compatible with the Convention rights. This may significantly affect diverse areas such as bioethics generally and medical law and medical ethics and the doctor-patient relationship in particular. It may also increase the weight of privacy-related rights in domestic law, and tend to facilitate the legal recognition of social and economic rights, such as rights to housing and welfare benefits.

On the other hand, dignity has been revealed by this article to be a highly complex concept. The content of its central core is not clear, making it an uncertain guide. The lack of clarity derives from two sources. The first is a lack of agreement about what makes human life good, both for individuals and for societies. The second is the various aspects of the way in which it operates. Human dignity may refer to characteristics or norms; it may relate to individuals, social groups, or the entire species; and it may be based on subjective or objective assessments of what amounts to a dignified way of life. Sometimes the dignity of the entire species will come into conflict with the dignity of individuals, as may happen in respect of bioethics. At other times, the dignity of the group and of the individual through membership of that group may pull in a different direction from the dignity of the individual, for example in relation to non-consensual male circumcision.56 Similarly, dignity derived from respect for people's sexual choices and orientations may not always be sufficient to override what is regarded as the inherent indignity (in terms of the human race as a whole or of individuals within it) of some sexual practices. The ideal of human dignity may limit rather than enhance the value *76 of individual autonomy, as the decision of the Conseil d'Etat in the dwarfthrowing case57 demonstrates.

As the late Dr Sebastian Poulter argued in his last work,58 societies must ultimately be able to say that some practices, however important to dignity or virtue in certain cultures, conflict so strongly with fundamental social values in a particular country that they must not be tolerated. The very nature of dignity, culturally and contextually specific as it is, and dependent as much on the viewpoint of the observer as on the aspirations of the protagonists, may sometimes need to be treated with cautious awareness of its limitations as well as its strengths. For instance, as the discussion here has shown, it is more readily overridden by competing public-interest considerations than those values and interests which genuinely constitute rights. One often finds that one person's dignity must give way to somebody else's autonomy or security, while relatively minor infringements of dignity do not carry very much weight when set against serious incursions on other important values and interests. Equally we have seen how the law may subjugate a person's autonomy or physical integrity to a court's ideas about what is necessary to protect an objective view of the dignity of that person or of humanity generally, opening the way to principled paternalism or legal moralism.

The strengths of the value of dignity in law are considerable, and English law will increasingly have to have regard to them as our legal system adjusts to the demands of the Human Rights Act 1998. At the same time, the power of dignity as a value to inform human-rights decision-making cannot hide the weaknesses of dignity as a basis for rights. It can never be more than one of a number of values, principles and policies which pull decision-makers in different directions. It was suggested near the beginning of this article that the idea of a right to dignity lacks coherence. We can now conclude that protecting dignity indirectly through interpreting and enforcing other rights in the light of dignity is potentially valuable but far from unproblematic. The value offers judges an instrument with which they could subvert the proper relationship between themselves and the legislature in a democracy, or undermine respect for individual autonomy. Important as dignity may be, the law can sensibly only protect people indirectly against violations of their dignity, and even that requires careful thought. Giving weight to dignity adds a new value to the legal system which changes the way in which questions are asked and answered, allowing a wider range of interests to be taken into account, but not thereby making intractable moral and legal issues any easier.


1. See Dawn Oliver, “The underlying values of public and private law”, in Michael Taggart (ed.), The Province of Administrative Law (1997) Ch. 11.
2. [1996] 4 All E.R. 385 at 401, CA.
3. R. v. Eastbourne (Inhabitants) (1803) 4 East 103 at 107; 102 E.R. 769 at 770, per Lord Ellenborough C.J.
4. See Part I of this article, [1999] P.L. 682 at 699.
5. Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act 1860, s.2.
6. Offences against the Person Act 1861, s.36.
7. [1999] 2 W.L.R. 1015, HL.
8. (1993) 103 D.L.R. (4th) 1, SC of Canada, at 33-34.
9. [1995] 1 W.L.R. 1372, CA, especially at 1377-1379, per Sir Thomas Bingham M.R.
10. The Times, August 16, 1996, p. 1. Further details, including the text of the affidavit sworn in support of the application, can be found in The Times, August 17, 1996, p. 2.
11. [1998] A.C. 147, HL.
12. [1994] 1 W.L.R. 689 at 696, CA.
13. Public Order Act 1986, ss.5, 4A as inserted by Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994.
14. [1992] 1 A.C. 58, HL.
15. The Times, April 1, 1999, CA.
16. Raymond v. Honey [1983] A.C. 1, HL; R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Simms [1999] 3 W.L.R. 328, HL.
17. Brooks v. Home Office, The Times, February 17, 1999.
18. See Malcolm D. Evans and Rod Morgan, Preventing Torture: A Study of the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1998) Ch. 8; Sir Nigel Rodley, The Treatment of Prisoners under International Law (2nd ed., 1999), Ch. 9.
19. See particularly R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, HL; R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, HL; R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Venables [1998] A.C. 407, HL.
20. [1999] 2 W.L.R. 1253, CA.
21. I and V v. United Kingdom, Eur. Ct. HR, Judgment of December 16, 1999, The Times, December 17, 1999.
22. Children Act 1989, s.63; Children's Homes Regulations 1991.
23. See Education Act 1996, ss.548, 550A, as amended.
24. Judgment of September 23, 1998.
25. [1998] 3 W.L.R. 936, CA, overruling Re S (Adult: Refusal of Treatment) [1993] Fam. 123 and Re T (Adult: Refusal of Treatment) [1993] Fam. 95, CA.
26. Re C (Adult: Refusal of Treatment) [1994] 1 W.L.R. 290.
27. Secretary of State for the Home Department v. Robb [1995] Fam. 127.
28. See Part I of this article, [1999] P.L. 682 at 700.
29. B. v. Croydon Health Authority [1995] Fam. 133, CA.
30. [1993] Fam. 46, CA.
31. Re R (A Minor) (Wardship: Consent to Treatment) [1992] Fam. 11, CA; Re T (A Minor) (Wardship: Medical Treatment) [1997] 1 W.L.R. 242, CA.
32. Re B (A Minor) (Wardship: Sterilisation) [1987] A.C. 199, HL; Re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation) [1990] 2 A.C. 1, HL.
33. Where sterilisation operations are to be performed on minors, there is now a statutory basis for the power to make an order under the Children Act 1989, s.8(1), in relation to which the procedure is laid down in Practice Note (Sterilisation: Minors and Mental Health Patients) [1993] 3 All E.R. 222, Fam. D.
34. [1998] 3 W.L.R. 107, HL.
35. See Airedale N.H.S. Trust v. Bland [1993] A.C. 789, HL; Frenchay Healthcare N.H.S. Trust v. S [1994] 1 W.L.R. 601, CA.
36. Re J (A Minor) (Wardship: Medical Treatment) [1991] Fam. 33, CA; Re J (A Minor) (Child in Care: Medical Treatment) [1993] Fam. 15, CA.
37. See John Finnis, “A philosophical case against euthanasia”, in John Keown (ed.), Euthanasia Examined: Ethical, Clinical and Legal Perspectives (1995) Ch. 2 at p. 31; Luke Gormally, “Walton, Davies, Boyd and the legalization of euthanasia”, ibid. Ch. 10 at p. 119; Joseph Boyle, “A case for sometimes tube-feeding patients in persistent vegetative state”, ibid. Ch. 13 at p. 195.
38. [1995] 1 W.L.R. 898, CA. Cf. R. v. North West Lancashire Health Authority, ex p. A, The Times, 24 August 1999, CA.
39. [1997] 2 W.L.R. 806, CA.
40. See Part I of this article, [1999] P.L. 682 at 684.
41. BVerfGE 37, 324 (1975), holding void that part of an Act of the Bundestag of 1974 allowing abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy without any requirement for necessity to be shown.
42. Kaye v. Robertson [1991] F.S.R. 62, CA.
43. [1995] 1 W.L.R. 804.
44. [1997] 3 W.L.R. 57, CA.
45. See, e.g. Halford v. United Kingdom, Eur.Ct.H.R., Judgment of June 25, 1997, 24 E.H.R.R. 523.
46. Re R (Wardship: Restrictions on Publication) [1994] Fam. 254, CA; Re W (A Minor) (Wardship: Restrictions on Publication) [1992] 1 W.L.R. 100, CA.
47. R. v. Brown (Anthony) [1994] 1 A.C. 212, HL.
48. Laskey, Jaggard and Brown v. United Kingdom, Judgment of February 19, 1997, 24 E.H.R.R. 39.
49. [1997] Q.B. 47, CA.
50. See R. v. Ministry of Defence, ex p. Smith [1996] Q.B. 517, CA.
51. See Case 13/94 P v. S [1996] I.C.R. 795, C.J.E.C.; Smith v. Gardner Merchant Ltd [1996] I.C.R. 790, EAT.
52. [1997] 2 F.L.R. 406.
53. See Fitzpatrick v. Sterling Housing Association [1999] 4 All E.R. 705, HL, a majority decision reversing that the Court of Appeal, [1998] Ch. 304, CA.
54. [1996] 4 All E.R. 1008 at 1020, CA.
55. See, e.g. Kaye v. Robertson [1991] F.S.R. 62, CA.
56. Female circumcision, whether consensual or not, having been outlawed in the United Kingdom except for therapeutic reasons by the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985.
57. C.E., ass., October 27, 1995, Cne de Morsang-sur-Orge, Dalloz Jur. 1995, p. 257; C.E., ass., October 27, 1995, Ville d'Aix-en-Provence, Rec. C.E., p. 372; Dalloz Jur., 1996, p. 177, with annotation by G. Leberton. See Part I of this article, [1999] P.L. at p. 701.
58. S. Poulter, Ethnicity, Law and Human Rights (1998).


END OF DOCUMENT


