### Human dignity and people with disabilities

SIGRID GRAUMANN

Concepts of human dignity gain special significance if their implications for persons with disabilities are considered. Disability activists and advocates speak about violation of the human dignity of people with disabilities with regard to involuntary institutionalization, medical treatment without consent, exclusion from education, work and social life, lack of assistance and care, risk of poverty, absence of respect for privacy, home and family, as well as the experience of disregard, disrespect and humiliation. Particularly, in the field of biomedicine and bioethics, disabled persons feel their dignity is violated due to selective abortion and end-of-life decisions based on an understanding of disability as 'wrongful life'. They identify the values and perspectives of scientists, physicians and ethicists holding such views as those of well-educated, middle-class members of society who 'prize intellect, rationality, and the goal of human health' (Ash 2001: 293). This corresponds to a negative assessment of the quality of life of people with disabilities, which in turn promotes degrading or insulting behaviour towards them (Hubbard 1997).

Human dignity is understood here not as an individual attribute or a special right but as the founding moral principle of an adequate human rights framework that is truly inclusive and universal and hence recognizes the particular needs and living conditions of people with diverse impairments. What follows is that, by stating that 'someone has dignity', what is expressed is that she or he has to be recognized as a bearer of human rights. And saying 'her dignity has been violated' indicates a systematic disregard of human rights.

Disability activists and advocates have recently been quite successful in implementing their views even in international law: in December 2006, the new Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ('the Convention') was adopted by the United Nations, that since then has been ratified by many states and has thus become part of their legal systems. In the following, I will first elaborate the concept of human dignity in the Convention, and subsequently defend it from a contemporary Kantian point of view (for example, O'Neill 1996; Wood 1999; Korsgaard 2000; Hill 2002).

#### **Human dignity and human rights in the Convention**

The Convention refers to human dignity in its very first paragraph:

The purpose of the present Convention is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.

With this wording, the Convention anticipates that respect for the dignity of disabled people cannot be taken for granted and therefore emphasizes the principle of inclusion in the protections defined by human rights. It is explicitly stated that *all* persons with disabilities, regardless of their individual impairment, shall be included.

Furthermore, the formulation states that people with disabilities are equals in dignity, and therefore should be treated with equal respect. In this way, the Convention takes a major step from the traditional policy of charity and welfare for disabled persons towards a new policy based on rights. The concepts of charity and welfare imply a paternalistic attitude towards disabled persons: they are connected with the idea of altruistic action and voluntary solidarity, where claim rights are not applicable and disabled people are rather expected to show gratitude for any potential aid. From a human rights perspective, alternatively, disabled persons are seen as subjects with equal rights and responsibilities, who should be given control over their own lives; heteronomy and paternalism are considered as violating human dignity and human rights (Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights/United Nations 2002).

The Convention follows in the footsteps of other conventions protecting groups in especially vulnerable situations. It does not formulate special rights; it rather takes general human rights, and specifies and defines them in relation to the special circumstances of disabled persons. The consequences are revolutionary, not only for disability politics but also for our conception of human rights. This is further reflected in changes to and the broadening of the terminology: the Convention conspicuously forgoes a final definition of disability. It refers to the 'social model', where a disability is understood as the interaction between the person's impairment and their environment. In doing so, the Convention questions deficit-orientated definitions, where disability, according to the 'medical model', is traced back to individual functional impairments. It is also important that discrimination is understood not only in a traditional way as the arbitrary denial of equal rights, but also as a lack of support and the absence of social recognition. When formulating separate rights, the Convention is very much in agreement with other human rights treaties. However, specifications within the Convention take into account the particular hazards that disabled persons are exposed to. For example, civil liberties, such as the right to freedom and security, are defined by forbidding compulsory confinement due to disability. Moreover, the convention links civil rights to the right to access social services that actually enable disabled persons to exercise their rights. Economic, social and cultural rights have special comprehensive specifications and definitions for disabled people. They guarantee that disabled persons, including those in need of extra support, have a self-determined and independent life with full and equal inclusion in all areas of society. This includes, for example, the right to have a family of one's own even when this includes parental assistance, the right to choose how and where and with whom one wants to live, as well as the right to an accessible working environment and full employment rights. In accordance with civil liberties, economic, social and cultural rights are linked to the comprehensive prohibition of patronizing tutelage (Kayess and French 2008; Graumann 2011: 80–134).

Taking all these aspects into consideration, the concepts of human dignity and human rights have been extensively developed (Megret ´ 2008). In particular, on the one hand, all people with disabilities are explicitly included, and on the other hand demands for respect and for care have been interlinked throughout the whole catalogue of human rights.

#### **The principle of inclusion in the protections defined by human rights**

The principle of inclusion in the protections specified in the human rights framework means in concrete terms that also newborn babies with disabilities and people with profound cognitive or intellectual impairments should be considered as moral and legal subjects. In the debate on human dignity, however, such a kind of universality is repeatedly questioned. Some argue that this kind of human dignity is based on controversial theological or metaphysical assumptions which cannot be generally accepted in a pluralistic society and an ideologically neutral state. Others criticize an inflationary and imprecise use of 'human dignity' that leads to a trivialization of the concept of human rights. Usually, such positions explicitly restrict dignity to human persons with the capacities required for autonomous moral agency (Griffin 2008: 151–2). However, if human dignity would be rooted in the exercise of capacities, then dignity could be ascribed or withdrawn by others (cf. Kopelman and Moskop 1984; Kittay and Carlson 2010).

In such debates, disability activists and advocates are among those who defend human dignity as a truly inclusive concept. They understand human dignity as based on the assumption that all human beings deserve equal respect irrespective of achievement, rank or social standing (Wood 1999: 111–55). This notion of human dignity must be distinguished from dignity as the particular estimation of a person on the basis of office or achievement. In the latter sense, 'dignity' distinguishes a particular person and may for example serve as a justification for privileges. Such privileges are usually accessible by persons with a high social status, not by those with any sort of impairment. Therefore, it is obviously not an attractive concept of dignity for people with disabilities.

In the context of disability, 'dignity' is also sometimes used in the sense of the subjective value attached to a person's life. According to this position, severe impairments, constant suffering and loss of independence lead to the judgment that a person's life is no longer worth living (cf. Kuhse and Singer 1985; McMahan 1996). However, such judgments are always highly subjective and biased by prejudices about what it means to live a life with disability. Thus, from the point of view of disability activists and advocates they are dangerous for people with disabilities (cf. Kittay 2005).

In Kantian ethics, respect for human dignity refers to the reciprocal obligation to treat other human beings 'always as an end and never as a means only' (Kant 1974: 61). In Kant, human dignity is founded in the capacity of autonomy and thus to the capacity for moral agency. However, disability activists and advocates usually share the view that autonomy need not be realized at all times in a person's life. According to such positions, it is the *potential* for autonomy that characterizes human beings as human beings and awards their dignity. This interpretation of the Kantian concept of human dignity ensures that people with disabilities are not at risk of being deprived of their dignity and rights due to judgments about their capacities and qualities by third parties.

However, in bioethical debates it is highly contested if belonging to the human species as such is of any moral significance. Without discussing this controversy in detail, in the following I will present three arguments in favour of a truly inclusive concept of human dignity and the protections defined by human rights that don't refer to a questionable normative concept of the human species (Graumann 2011: 258–66):

- (1) Considering the living conditions of people with disabilities, it is obvious that the concept of autonomy and its use in contemporary liberal moral and political philosophy is an unrealistic ideal (Nussbaum 2006: 25f). If fully developed autonomy were required for ascribing human dignity, babies and little children as well as many persons of old age or with illnesses or disabilities would lack the protections provided by human dignity and human rights. A realistic understanding instead considers autonomy as a developmental concept realized to different degrees in certain periods of life. On this understanding, not the developed capacity of autonomy of a particular person, but the potential for autonomy of the human being – regardless of the degree of individual development of this capacity – should be considered as the basis of human dignity.
- (2) One could answer that at least a certain potential for autonomy should be required for the concept of human dignity to make any sense. James Griffin, for example, states that it should not be applied to 'persons deep in dementia' (Griffin 2008: 151). The same would be true, according to Griffin's view, for babies born with a very limited life expectancy or adults with profound intellectual or cognitive impairments. This would imply that a line has to be drawn between individuals with sufficient and those with insufficient capacity for autonomy. However, any evaluation of the particular potentiality for autonomy of an individual person would unavoidably be loaded

with uncertainty and arbitrariness. Moreover, it would entail that a certain group has to be authorized to judge the (potential) degree of autonomy an individual has achieved or will achieve. Such a hierarchical division of authorized persons and others would be inconsistent with the principle of equal respect articulated in the human rights framework. That should be reason enough, I think, for us to generally avoid drawing such a line.

- (3) Every needy human being depends on being included in a community where others care for her well-being regardless of her individual skills and features. All human persons take part in such a 'primary moral community' long before they are able to understand themselves as autonomous agents. And some may not even come to understand themselves as such if others were not to provide the support and care they needed without being asked (MacIntyre 1999: 82f). Such positions are based on an insight into the fundamental dependency on others as part of human life, and thus consider the primary moral community as unquestionable. Rather similar to this position is Hannah Arendt's notion of the right to have rights, which likewise can be understood as a prior claim of membership (Arendt 1949; Benhabib 2004: 49f). Such arguments might not count as strictly logical deductions for the duty to include all persons with disabilities in the protections defined by human dignity and human rights; nevertheless, they show, I think, that a truly inclusive concept of human dignity is convincing. If we pose the question in what kind of society we would like to live, the answer would be, I think, that we don't want to live in a society which excludes particular persons according to the decision of third parties. And if we want to avoid that particular persons, for instance because they have an impairment, could be excluded, the inclusive primary moral community should be taken for granted.
#### **The principle of universal respect for human rights**

The inclusive notion of human dignity and the developmental concept of autonomy are in line with further developments of the concept of human rights. From the perspective of disabled persons with a high need for assistance and care in their daily life, it is obvious that a traditional concept of human rights, primarily understood in terms of negative rights, would contradict the idea of equality. Many disabled persons are only able to exercise their human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis with others if access to proper support, assistance and care is ensured. This means that demands for respect and care have to be equally included in an adequate concept of human dignity and human rights (Graumann 2011: 270–91).

Some contemporary interpretations of the Kantian concept of human dignity also support this view. According to these positions, Kant's moral imperative to treat others as ends in themselves entails not only that we should not harm, exploit or patronize others, but also that we are morally obligated to actively contribute to their well-being (Korsgaard 2000: 124–8; Hill 2002: 106– 24). Correspondingly, the Convention includes not only negative rights ruling out interventions in a person's life by the state or other third parties, but also the universally binding obligation to recognize positive rights to receive the social services required to enable disabled people to participate fully in society, if necessary with social support. Furthermore, respect for diversity, equal rights and opportunities means not only the absence of environmental obstacles but also the active promotion of the societal recognition of disabled persons.

However, positive rights correspond to positive duties. We can force others to respect our negative rights – to abstain from taking our life, injuring us, offending us, etc. Assuming the duty to help us, to support us or to care for us, however, requires much more personal energy and action. This is why positive duties are related to a certain degree of voluntariness: if a person were forced to assume positive duties, her own negative rights might be violated. But how should we conceptualize universally binding, positive rights if others can't be forced to help, support and care for us?

The rights of persons with disabilities to support, assistance and care and the corresponding duties of beneficence and solidarity can be justified by reference to Kant's principle of human dignity and an extended interpretation of his doctrine of justice, which, on the one hand, includes comprehensive claims for solidarity and, on the other, retains a consistent refusal of any form of paternalism. As mentioned above, Kant's concept of human dignity includes the moral obligation to promote the well-being of others. With her twofold distinction of charitable duties as complete or incomplete duties and as general or specific duties, Onora O'Neill elaborates what this means in terms of legal obligations which can be externally enforced (O'Neill 1996: 122f). As moral duties all duties of beneficence are categorically binding. However, whether and to what extent we can force these on others is conditional. Complete duties of beneficence such as emergency aid can be externally enforced. Incomplete duties of charity, however – such as helping the poor – leave space for interpretation regarding when, in favour of whom and to what extent they are exercised. Specific duties of charity are duties of beneficence in specific relationships of care. We consider them as morally and legally binding from within existing personal and professional relationships, but individuals are granted space to choose freely whether to establish and maintain such relationships. Furthermore, there are also certain limits of enforcing care in personal and professional relationships; we cannot, for instance, enforce attitudes of love and passion which are necessary for good care. If we consider the fact that many persons (not only those with impairments) depend on the help, support and care provided by others on the one hand, and the insight that charitable duties can or should only be externally enforced under particular conditions on the other, we can define the public obligations concerning the Convention more precisely. The Convention reveals the necessity to establish social and institutional conditions that are able to support personal caring relations, as well as to replace them by professional care if needed. The corresponding positive duties are not only individual obligations of beneficence but also collective duties of solidarity, for which the state is responsible on behalf of its citizens. These are universally binding because they are necessary to guarantee equal rights for all citizens and because they are not overly demanding with regard to individual persons; thus they do not infringe upon their negative liberty rights. This means that the adequate protection of human rights, particularly of weaker and more vulnerable persons, entails on the one hand the obligation to support care in familial and private relationships, and on the other hand the guarantee of good, professional assistance and care through social services. At the same time, paternalism has to be avoided.

To conclude, there are convincing arguments for the recognition of the rich concept of human dignity and how it is put forward by disability activists and advocates. Human dignity requires social conditions in which the protection, not only of negative rights but also of positive rights, is institutionally anchored. This means that help and care for weaker and dependent members of our societies should be guaranteed and a social climate which promotes a moral attitude of recognition of these fundamental rights and the individual and collective readiness to assume the corresponding positive duties has to be established. Furthermore, the social conditions that are necessary to realize a truly inclusive and universal concept of human dignity and human rights, while acknowledging the individual needs and situations of all persons with disabilities, have to be created.

#### **References**

- Arendt, H. 1949. 'Es gibt nur ein einziges Menschenrecht', *Die Wandlung IV*. Heidelberg: Schneider, 754–70
- Ash, A. 2001. 'Disability, Bioethics, and Human Rights', in G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman, M. Bury (eds.). *Handbook of Disability Studies*. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 297–326
- Benhabib, S. 2004. *The Rights of Others*. Cambridge University Press
- Graumann, S. 2011. *Assistierte Freiheit: Von einer Behindertenpolitik der Wohltӓtigkeit zu einer Politik der Menschenrechte*. Frankfurt am Main: Campus
- Griffin, J. 2008. *On Human Rights*. Oxford University Press
- Hill, T. E. 2002.*Human Welfare and Moral Worth: Kantian Perspektives*. Oxford University Press
- Hubbard, R. 1997. 'Abortion and Disability', in L. J. Davis (ed.). *The Disability Studies Reader*. New York: Routledge, 187–202
- Kant, I. 1974. *Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten, in Werkausgabe*, vol. VII, ed. W. Weischedel. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 9–102
- Kayess, R., and French, P. 2008. 'Out of Darkness into Light? Introducing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities', *Human Rights Law Review* 8: 1–34
- Kittay, E. F. 2005. 'At the Margins of Moral Personhood', *Ethics* 116: 100–31
- Kittay, E. F., and Carlson, L. (eds.). 2010. *Cognitive Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy*. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell
- Kopelman, L., and Moskop, J. C. (eds.). 1984. *Ethics and Mental Retardation*. Dordrecht, Boston: D. Riedel Publishing Company
- Korsgaard, C. M. 2000. *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*. Cambridge University Press
- Kuhse, H., and Singer, P. 1985. *Should the Baby Live? The Problem of Handicapped Infants*. Oxford University Press
- MacIntyre, A. 1999. *Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues*. Chicago: Open Court
- McMahan, J. 1996. 'Cognitive Disability, Misfortune and Justice', *Philosophy and Public Affairs* 35: 3–35
- Megret, F. ´ 2008. 'The Disabilities Convention: Towards a Holistic Concept of Rights', *International Journal of Human Rights* 12(2): 261–77
- Nussbaum, M. 2006. *Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- O'Neill, O.1996.*Towards Justice and Virtue: A Constructive Account of Practical Reasoning*. Cambridge University Press
- Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights/United Nations. 2002.*Human Rights and Disability: The Current Use and Future Potential of United Nations Human Rights Instruments in the Context of Disability*. G. Quinn and T. Degener with A. Bruce, C. Burke and J. Castellino. New York/Geneva: United Nations
- Wood, A. W. 1999. *Kant's Ethical Thought*. Cambridge University Press