### Human dignity in French law

STEPHANIE HENNETTE-VAUCHEZ ´

As most of the contributions to this part of the handbook have underlined, human dignity certainly is a foundational concept of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). The UDHR however, can hardly be described as foundational – or even central – to the French legal order. Although it was signed in Paris, the technical fact that France never ratified the Declaration is quite emblematic of its actual standing within the French legal order.1 That is to say, the human dignity concept that underpins the Declaration has a rather limited echo in French law. Although it did have a strong philosophical and political influence in the post-war decades, it remained essentially absent from legal norms; mostly, it was an a-juridical principle. When, later on, it eventually was articulated as a legal (constitutional) concept, its meaning began to be intensely debated and some of its normative uses did in fact part with its function as a basis of and premise for human rights. To this day, both the meaning and the importance of a legal principle of human dignity remain uncertain in France.

#### **Human dignity: an uncertain concept**

France prides itself on the global influence of its 1789 Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen, and gloriously tends to speak and stand up to the world as the land of human rights. But the 1789 Declaration ignores human dignity, and the dignity of man that the UDHR promoted was mostly absent from French law until well into the 1990s (Girard and Hennette-Vauchez 2005); it remained, in other words, a concept that legal theorists and human rights activists would refer to as the ultimate justification for human rights, but that was only very marginally used in positive law.

There were, surely, traces of a legal concept of dignity prior to the last decade of the twentieth century, but in their vast majority these were (and remain) heirs to an ancient concept of *dignitas*: related to social and professional statuses rather than to human nature. Regardless of the continued relevance of this particular structure of the legal concept of dignity in contemporary French law

<sup>1</sup> The UDHR was published in the *Journal officiel* on 9 February 1949, but was never ratified. Consequently, it is not technically included within the national legal order and thus cannot be judicially invoked.

(Hennette-Vauchez 2009; 2011), 'dignity' in that sense certainly became increasingly less central as French society democratized and experienced a 'leveling-up process', the effect of which was a generalization of 'the respect and solicitude for dignity that was previously confined to a particular high and exclusive rank of humanity' (Whitman 2003: 245). Mostly, it became contained in nationality law2 or the law of professions.

Progressively, however, a concept of 'human dignity' did start to appear in various branches of law, albeit in a loose and mostly inarticulate fashion. Legal rules aiming at explicitly protecting the workers' dignity emerged from the 1980s onwards (Revet 1999) – in particular, the imposition of working conditions contrary to human dignity became a criminal offence in 1992. In parallel, the elevation of socio-economic rights after the Second World War contributed to consolidating the idea that rights such as the right to work were instrumental to the flourishing and even to the respect for human dignity. However, socio-economic rights have lastingly been constructed as less binding than civil and political ones (not judicially enforceable).3 The regulation of the freedom of expression is yet another field in which the concept of human dignity has played a role. A 1986 law states that freedom of communication can be constrained by the human dignity principle. This has led judges to examine cases in which radio stations had been sanctioned for airing talk shows during which degrading or insulting words had been proffered.4 Other leading cases include those in which the supreme judicial court ruled that the publication of photographs of President Mitterrand on his deathbed5 or *pr´efet* Claude Erignac lying dead on the street after his assassination in Corsica6 was contrary to the human dignity principle.

The principle's fate was to change, however, in the 1990s, a decade during which human dignity became a constitutional principle.

#### **Attempts to institute human dignity as a constitutional principle**

Before turning to the transformation of the legal principle of dignity from either an old principle of *dignitas* or a scattered and largely disunited presence

- 2 It is noteworthy that recurring legislative proposals amount to reactivating such mechanisms (*d´ech´eance de nationalit´e*) in cases such as those of naturalized citizens convicted of criminal offences against police officers; see draft proposal: Assemblee´ Nationale, Projet de loi No. 2400 relatif a l'immigration, ` a l'int ` egration et ´ a la ` nationalite, Art. ´ 3bis (although it was eventually rejected; see www.assembleenationale.fr/13/projets/pl2400.asp, accessed 28 March 2013).
- 3 On both these aspects, see the research project led by Diane Roman and related publications: http://droits-sociaux.u-paris10.fr/index.php?id=23.
- 4 Conseil d'Etat, 9 October 1996, *Association Ici et Maintenant*, req. 173073; Conseil d'Etat, 20 May 1996, *St´e Vortex*, req. 167694.
- 5 Cour d'Appel de Paris, 2 July 1997.
- 6 Cour de Cassation, 1re ch. civile, 20 December 2000, req. 98-13875.

in French law into a new *constitutional principle of human dignity*, it must be noted that there had been previous attempts, throughout the century, to elevate the principle to the constitutional level. The first of these attempts dates back to the Vichy regime that ruled for four years after France's military capitulation in 1940, albeit on uncertain constitutional grounds and while collaborating with Nazi Germany. Unsurprisingly, the principle of dignity that it tentatively put forth, although nominally a principle of *human* dignity, did not resemble the one articulated in the UDHR.

The Vichy regime rested on uncertain grounds: not only was the constitutionality of the law of 19407 that put an end to the Third Republic and designated Marec´ hal Petain highly dubious, but also the *r´egime de Vichy* never adopted a new constitution, resulting in a loose and floating constitutional nature of the regime. Drafts were written, however, and they did contain several references to a constitutional principle of dignity. For instance, one draft proclaimed that 'human dignity is an intrinsic quality of the human person that she should always be able to oppose to the Nation, the State or other social groups'. Another ruled that '[t]he State respects and protects the human person, her life, her dignity, her soul' (Le Floch 2003). These are thus constitutional projects that refer to a principle of human dignity. However, they simultaneously contained rules such as the total prohibition on political parties, familial suffrage or the superiority of duties over rights. These elements suggest that, again, the human dignity principle that is referred to in those texts remains quite alien to the one that was to be proclaimed a couple of years later in the UDHR. This is interesting not only from the internal perspective of French law, but also more generally in that it reminds us that the readily positive and very human-rights-related apprehension we may have of the human dignity principle actually must be restated as the result of a social process throughout which the principle did in fact gain positive connotations – a process, however, which did not accompany the human dignity principle *ab initio*.

To be sure, French law did not stand free from exposure to the growing influence and pervasiveness of international human rights law. To a certain extent, it is then only consequent that the human dignity principle did gain in importance in France after the Second World War, as exemplified by the first draft of the constitution of the Fourth Republic, which was to be submitted to referendum. Several of its provisions referred to human dignity, in particular as a basis for social and economic rights. For instance, Article 22 read as follows: 'Every human being has rights that guarantee his full physical, intellectual and moral development, while respecting his integrity and dignity.' In a similar vein, Article 27 foresaw that 'Neither working time nor working conditions should infringe on workers' health, dignity or familial life'.8 Finally, Article 28 referred

<sup>7</sup> See www.assemblee-nationale.fr/histoire/suffrage universel/suffrage-1940 loi-constitutionnelle.asp.

<sup>8</sup> Translation by the present author.

to the principle according to which both men and women should earn wages that allow them to live a 'dignified life'. Significantly, though, this particular draft was not approved by the people of France in the referendum that took place on 19 April 1946 – and the human dignity principle was no longer referred to in the subsequent draft that was eventually approved and became the constitution of 27 October 1946. This, of course, should not be read as implying that the first constitutional project was rejected *because* it contained the human dignity principle; it does, however, serve as a partial explanation for the principle's absence in constitutional law in particular until very recently.

#### **Human dignity as a principle of constitutional value**

It is only since a ruling by the Constitutional Council of 29 July 1994 that the human dignity principle has been rediscovered, under the guise of a 'principle of constitutional value'.9 The Constitutional Council had to decide on the conformity of the Law of Bioethics with constitutional provisions. It upheld the text and did so by articulating, for the first time, a constitutional principle of human dignity (by way of deduction from the very first and rather vague phrases of the constitutional Preamble that referred to the atrocities of the Second World War).10

Ever since this landmark decision by the Constitutional Council, the legal principle of human dignity in France has been torn between two main interpretations. On the one hand, it has served as a vector for either the foundation or the expansion of a number of human rights – especially in the field of social rights. Various pieces of legislation and judicial rulings have grounded social rights and social protection mechanisms on the principle of human dignity. A law of 1998 proclaims that 'the fight against social exclusion is a national imperative grounded on the respect of all human beings' equal dignity';11 and the Constitutional Council ruled in 1995 that the right to decent housing was a constitutional objective that stemmed from the constitutional principle of human dignity.12

On the other hand, however, the principle of human dignity's dignitarian echo (as opposed to its utilitarian or human-rights-inspired dimensions, cf. Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001; Brownsword 2003; 2005) has been particularly strong, both in French law and in French legal debate. In many instances, the principle of human dignity has served to ground obligations of the individual

- 9 Conseil Constitutionnel, 27 July 1994, 94-343–344 DC, Loi Bioethique. ´
- 10 'In the morrow of the victory achieved by the free peoples over the regimes that had sought to enslave and degrade humanity, the people of France proclaim anew that each human being, without distinction of race, religion or creed, possesses sacred and inalienable rights.'
- 11 Loi No. 98-657 of 29 July 1998 d'orientation relative a la lutte contre les exclusions. `
- 12 Conseil Constitutionnel, 19 January 1995, 94-359 DC, Loi relative a la diversit ` e de ´ l'habitat.

towards a higher instance of humanity, or towards the parcel of humanity of which he is a repository but not a proprietor. This has been true in the famous dwarf-throwing cases that have led the Supreme Administrative Court to rule that the protection of human dignity as an abstract aim could validly ground *a priori* administrative restrictions on the use of civil liberties;13 it has also been true of restrictions on the individual right to refuse life-saving medical treatments,14 freedom and autonomy of contract (Marella 2006) or administrative control of broadcasting.15 More strikingly, these dignitarian uses of the human dignity principle were enthusiastically praised by large segments of French legal elites. Emblematically, the idea that those legal uses of the principle that tend to affirm it as a basis for social rights and entitlements are flawed (in that they imply a degradation of the sheer ontological superiority of the principle) found wide support over the years. In the words of a prominent constitutional scholar: 'The extension of the human dignity principle to social rights . . . leads to protecting no longer the human person, but the individual as an entity seized within the tensions and contradictions of the social world. The human dignity principle then loses its specificity; it becomes diluted, and is lowered down to the level of other social rights with which it then starts to compete' (Mathieu 1998).

#### **Further change?**

At the time of writing, it may well be that the human dignity principle's fate is changing in France. In 2008, President Nicolas Sarkozy appointed a committee of experts in constitutional law with the task of deciding whether it was necessary to change or complement the 1946 constitutional Preamble (which to this day remains the main source of constitutional human rights within the French legal order). In fact, the question was not that open, for President Sarkozy had clearly indicated his own preference for a revision of the Preamble and had insisted in particular on the necessity to give constitutional standing to the human dignity principle by means of explicit inclusion in the written basic law of France.16 The experts' committee did not, however, follow his idea (Veil 2008). This was, first, because it chose to insist at relatively great length on the strong ambiguities inherent in the legal principle of human dignity. After explicitly

- 14 On ambiguities of French case law on the right to refuse medical treatment, see Hennette-Vauchez 2004.
- 15 In 2001, when reality shows were first broadcast on French television, the High Authority for Audiovisual Communication (Conseil Superieur de l'Audiovisuel) ´ issued a recommendation according to which participants in the show should not be filmed twenty-four hours a day, even if they consented to it, out of respect for the principle of human dignity. See Communique No. ´ 449 of 14 May 2001.
- 16 See Gomez 2008.

<sup>13</sup> Conseil d'Etat, Ass., 27 October 1995, Commune de Morsang-sur-Orge.

acknowledging the fact that these stemmed from diverging philosophical and ideological standpoints, the committee's official report opposed two of its main understandings: one in which the human dignity principle serves as a protection against aggression from and domination by other subjects, the other in which dignity constitutes a limitation on each individual's liberty (Veil 2008: 94). Subsequently, the committee insisted that as far as 'dignity' went, it could only recommend the inclusion, within the text of the Constitution, of a principle of 'equal dignity of all' – but not that of a 'human dignity principle'. The endorsement of such a clear-cut distinction between egalitarian and dignitarian understandings of the principle by an official body of experts in constitutional law was an important step in the debate that has been unfolding over the human dignity principle for a decade or so. It does seem, however, that the report is unlikely to get a concrete follow-up. To this day, no project of constitutional amendment has been drafted and the situation in which 'human dignity' is a judge-made constitutional principle and 'equal dignity' is mostly absent from norms of higher level, is likely to last.

The critical move that the committee's report sought to make *vis-`a-vis* an uncritically confident embrace of the human dignity principle nonetheless did find an echo in other important legal arenas. In particular, the French Conseil d'Etat, which played a crucial role in 1995 when it upheld the human-dignitybased bans on dwarf-throwing, now seems to have distanced itself from its previous position on the issue. Indeed, it was asked at the beginning of 2010, in its advisory capacity, to give an opinion on the possible legal grounds for legislative action aimed at banning the public wearing of the *niqab* (Conseil d'Etat 2010). Since the human dignity principle had often been referred to as a relevant ground for action in the public debate that had been ongoing for some months at the time, the Conseil d'Etat gave its opinion on that particular aspect of the project. But again, one reads in the advisory opinion that the principle of human dignity is an inappropriate and indeed dangerous ground for such a ban: 'the assessment of what does or does not detract from the dignity of the person is at least potentially comparatively subjective' (Conseil d'Etat 2010: 22). Again, this particular difficulty is linked to the great ambivalence of the human dignity principle, for several opposing understandings of the principle exist: 'that of the collective moral requirement to protect human dignity, perhaps at the expense of the freedom of determination and that of the protection of self-determination as a consubstantial aspect of the human person' (*ibid*.: 21–2) – especially since, as the opinion recalls, 'the wearing of the full veil is in most cases voluntary' (*ibid*.: 22). To be sure, the government decided to ignore this advisory opinion and went ahead with the legislative draft that eventually was adopted in Parliament and upheld by the Constitutional Council albeit devoid of any reference to the human dignity principle. These episodes have, however, considerably weakened the dignitarian approach of the human dignity principle – or, at least, they have made its dangers more conspicuous.

#### **References**

- Beyleveld, D., and Brownsword, R. 2001. *Human Dignity in Bioethics and Biolaw*. Oxford University Press
- Brownsword, R. 2003. 'Bioethics Today, Bioethics Tomorrow: Stem Cell Research and the Dignitarian Alliance', *Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy* 17: 15–51
	- 2005. 'Stem Cells and Cloning: Where the Regulatory Consensus Fails', *New England Law Review* 39: 535–71
- Conseil d'Etat. 2010. 'Etude sur les possibilites juridiques d'interdiction du port du ´ voile integral', www.conseil-etat.fr/cde/media/document/RAPPORT%20ETUDES/ etude voile integral anglais.pdf (in English) (accessed 22 April 2013)
- Girard, C., and Hennette-Vauchez, S. 2005. *La dignit´e de la personne humaine: Recherche sur un processus de juridicisation*. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France
- Gomez, M. 2008. 'La constitution pourrait s'ouvrir a la bio ` ethique', La Croix, ´ 9 January 2008
- Hennette-Vauchez, S. 2004. 'Kant contre Jehovah? Refus de soins et dignite de la personne ´ humaine', *Recueil Dalloz* 3154–60
	- 2009. 'Une dignitas humaine? Vielles outres, vin nouveau', *Droits. Revue fran¸caise de th´eorie juridique* No. 48, 59–85
	- 2011. 'A Human Dignitas? Remnants of the Ancient Legal Concept in Contemporary Dignity Jurisprudence', *International Journal of Constitutional Law* 9(1): 32–57
- Le Floch, E. 2003. 'Les projets de constitution de Vichy (1940–1944)', PhD dissertation. Universite Paris II Panth ´ eon Assas ´
- Marella, M. R. 2006. 'The Old and New Limits to the Freedom of Contract in Europe', *European Review of Contract Law* 2: 257–74
- Mathieu, B. 1998. *Constitution et ethique biom´edicale*, N. Lenoir, B. Mathieu and D. Maus (eds.). La Documentation Franc¸aise, 50–1
- Revet, T. 1999. 'La dignite de la personne humaine en droit du travail', in M. L. Pavia and ´ T. Revet (eds.), *La dignit´e de la personne humaine*. Paris: Economica
- Veil, S. 2008. *Red´ecouvrir le Pr´eambule de la Constitution: Rapport au President de la R´epublique*. Paris: La Documentation Franc¸aise
- Whitman, J. Q. 2000. 'Enforcing Civility and Respect: Three Societies', *Yale Law Journal* 109: 1279–1398
	- 2003. 'On Nazi "Honor" and New European "Dignity', in C. Joerges and N. S. Ghaleigh (eds.), *Darker Legacies of Law in Europe: The Shadow of National Socialism and Fascism over Europe and Its Legal Tradition*. Oxford: Hart Publishing