### Kantian dignity: a critique

SAMUEL J. KERSTEIN

No philosophical discussion of dignity influences current debate more than Immanuel Kant's. Interwoven with central tenets of his ethics, this discussion admits of various interpretations. According to a prominent one, Kant defends the view that dignity is an unconditional and incomparable value possessed by all persons and only persons.1 This chapter assesses the philosophical plausibility of this view, arguing that, although it has attractive features, it suffers from serious flaws.

Kant's discussion of the dignity of humanity is centred in the *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals* (Kant 1996a) and the *Metaphysics of Morals* (Kant 1996b). Kant uses 'humanity' interchangeably with 'rational nature' (Kant1996a: 439). In his view, having rational nature involves having certain capacities, including the capacity to set and to pursue ends as well as the capacity to act autonomously (Hill 1992:38–41). To have the capacity to act autonomously, that is, to conform to self-given moral imperatives purely out of respect for these imperatives, is to have a distinctive kind of freedom, according to Kant. A being has dignity if and only if it possesses rational nature, he suggests. If there are any human beings who do not possess rational nature, then they do not have dignity. But any being, human or not, who does possess rational nature has dignity.2 Let us call any being who possesses rational nature a 'person'. Rational nature is a threshold concept, in Kant's view. If a being has the capacities that are constitutive of rational nature, it has rational nature, regardless of how wellor ill-developed those capacities may be.

To say that humanity has dignity is to say that it has a special value or, equivalently, worth. This value has three main features.3 First, it attaches to

- 1 This sort of view has been defended, for example, in Hill 1992; Paton 1967; and Schonecker and Wood ¨ 2003.
- 2 This point is controversial. Some scholars defend the view that, according to Kant, dignity is possessed not by all beings with a rational nature, but rather only by those who have a good will (Dean 2006). Roughly speaking, a person has a good will if she has a disposition to conform her actions to the moral law and to do so on the ground that this law is authoritative for her will.
- 3 For a very different interpretation of what Kant means by dignity, see Sensen 2009 and 2011.

something that exists rather than to something that does not but that might be brought about. An appropriate response to a value of the sort humanity has is to honour, cherish or preserve it, rather than to create more of it. Second, the worth of humanity is unconditional (Kant 1996a: 428). Something has unconditional worth in Kant's sense only if it is good no matter what the context of its existence is. As unconditionally good, humanity is valuable no matter how it came to exist or what the effects of its existence may be. Moreover, if something is unconditionally valuable in Kant's sense, then neither what it affects nor what happens to it can at all diminish its goodness (Kant 1996a: 393–4).

Finally, to say that humanity has dignity is to say that it has incomparable worth: it has no equivalent for which it can be legitimately exchanged (Kant 1996a: 434–6; Kant 1996b: 434–5, 462). Humanity can never be legitimately sacrificed for or replaced by something with mere price. Not even all the diamonds in South Africa would truly compensate for the killing of one person. Moreover, since humanity possesses incomparable worth, it cannot even be legitimately sacrificed for or replaced by something else with such worth (Hill 1992: 47–9). It makes no sense to say that in some context one or more persons have more or less value than one or more other persons. In Kant's view, everything that lacks incomparable worth, including human happiness and well-being, has mere price. In sum, all and only extant beings who possess rational nature possess dignity: unconditional and incomparable value.

Kant seems to invoke the special value of rational nature when he expresses what he takes to be the supreme principle of morality (the Categorical Imperative): 'So act that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means' (Kant 1996a: 429). Treating humanity as an end, as this 'Formula of Humanity' (FH) commands, seems to amount to treating it as something that has dignity. On one prominent interpretation of this principle, the Formula of Humanity amounts to an imperative always to act in a way that expresses respect for the worth of humanity, in one's own person as well as that of another (Wood 1999: 141). Let us call this principle RFH, since it is a specification of Kant's Formula of Humanity that invokes the notion of expressing *respect* for humanity's value, that is, for its dignity. Any action that fails to express respect for humanity's value does so at least in part by suggesting an inaccurate message regarding what this value is. So, for example, an account of what makes (or purportedly makes) an attempt at suicide wrong would necessarily include the notion that it expresses a false message, namely, that some person, presumably the one trying to kill himself, does not have dignity. Moreover, if an action expresses such a message, then it expresses disrespect for the value of humanity and is morally impermissible.

The Kantian account of dignity has several features many of us find attractive. For example, an individual's dignity does not on this account vary with his wealth, social status, or achievements. Any being who has the capacities requisite for possessing dignity has no less (and no more) dignity than anyone else. Moreover, RFH seems to capture a core of ordinary moral thinking. It would forbid an action that aimed to maximize the preservation of dignity by killing one innocent person who wants to go on living in order to preserve the lives of two others. For such an action would suggest that persons have comparable value. Finally, the Kantian account seems to cohere with and might even provide a foundation for some appeals to dignity in international law. For example, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) suggests that the human rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 'derive from the inherent dignity of the human person'.4 Some of the rights specified in the UDHR might be anchored in the Kantian account. For example, Article 4 articulates a right not to be held in slavery. Holding a person in slavery would express disrespect for her dignity: it would send the message that she had mere price.

But the Kantian account faces serious difficulties. Most of us grant that persons have a special value. Yet why should we conclude that they have incomparable or unconditional value, as Kant defines it? Contemporary philosophers have interpreted Kant to unfurl or at least to suggest sophisticated arguments for this conclusion. The arguments have the following general structure: unless you are willing to give up some very plausible, general belief regarding your agency, you are rationally compelled to hold that persons have dignity (or at least unconditional value). But the arguments incorporate dubious claims like the following: if you believe that you have the capacity to determine which ends are good, then you are rationally compelled to embrace the view that you yourself are good (Wood 2008: 90–2; Korsgaard 1996: 122–3). Proponents of such claims leave unexplained why your believing the former would commit you to the latter any more than your believing that you have the capacity to determine which ends are bad would commit you to the view that you yourself are bad (Kerstein 2001:33–4). Of course, the failure of abstract philosophical arguments for the Kantian account of the dignity of persons would not necessarily leave it devoid of support.5 It might gain credibility by capturing better than alternative accounts the dictates of reflective common sense on the worth of persons and what that worth implies. But, as discussed below, it is questionable whether it does.

One oft-remarked difficulty that surrounds the Kantian account of dignity concerns the status of some beings who seem not to have rational nature, for example, non-human animals and very young children (Warren 1997: 101–4). If these beings indeed fail to have rational nature, then they have mere price, according to the account. But how, then, is our treatment of them subject to moral constraints?

- 4 ICESCR, Preamble.
<sup>5</sup> For a further critique of arguments that purport to show that we are rationally compelled to hold that persons have dignity as defined in the Kantian account, see Christiano 2008.

Kantian philosophers have tried to reply to such questions (O'Neill 1998; Denis 2000). Allen Wood insists, for example, that we do not manifest proper respect for rational nature unless we treat some beings who are not persons just as if they were persons (Wood 2008: 97). For, he says, our treatment of beings who are not persons sometimes expresses disrespect for persons. It would, for example, express disrespect for rational nature not to help it to grow to maturity in a child in whom it has already started to develop.

But this last point is questionable to say the least. It would not show disrespect to the *child's* rational nature to refrain from furthering its development; for by stipulation the child does not possess rational nature. Perhaps refraining from furthering the child's development would express disrespect for the rational nature of others, namely, those who aim to promote his thriving. But what if, unfortunately for the child, no one has this aim? Of course, not furthering the child's development might express disrespect for the child's *capacity to develop* rational nature. But that capacity, which is presumably possessed by human embryos, is obviously not the same thing as rational nature itself, which is presumably not possessed by them. And it is not clear that expressing disrespect for the capacity to develop rational nature amounts to expressing disrespect for rational nature itself.

In any case, perhaps embracing all of the premises Kant or some Kantians invoke in support of the conclusion that persons have dignity would entail holding that non-persons have mere price. But it is worth noting that, taken in itself, the idea that beings with rational nature have dignity seems perfectly compatible with the notion that some beings devoid of it nevertheless have a value that transcends that of mere things.

There are, however, further difficulties with the Kantian account of dignity. It generates normative verdicts that are at odds with considered judgments held by many of us. (If philosophical arguments rationally compelled us to embrace the account, then we might have to give up these judgments. But, as stated above, it is doubtful whether they do.)

Consider first cases of what many of us take to be heroic self-sacrifice. A United States soldier, Private First Class (PFC) Ross McGinnis, was awarded posthumously a military honour, the Silver Star. PFC McGinnis was manning the machine gun on a combat truck when someone threw a grenade towards it. He tried to deflect the grenade, but it went down the vehicle's top hatch. The narrative accompanying the military honour continues as follows:

When an average man would have leapt out of the gunner's cupola to safety, PFC McGinnis decided to stay with his crew. Unhesitatingly and with complete disregard for his own life he announced 'the grenade is in the truck' and threw his back over the grenade to pin it between his body and the truck's radio mount. When the grenade detonated, PFC McGinnis absorbed all lethal fragments and the concussion with his own body, killing him instantly. His early warning allowed all four members of his crew to position their bodies in a protective posture to prepare for the grenade's blast. As a result of his quick reflexes and heroic measures, no other members of the vehicle crew were seriously wounded in the attack. His gallant action and total disregard for his personal well-being directly saved four men from certain serious injury or death. (Arlington National Cemetery website)6

Many of us believe that PFC McGinnis' action was not only morally permissible, but also morally admirable. Yet RFH implies that it was wrong. According to the narrative, PFC McGinnis' action of throwing his back over the grenade showed 'total disregard for his personal well-being' and 'complete disregard for his own life'. The narrative implies that McGinnis intentionally allowed himself to be killed in order to save his comrades, or at least that in order to save them, he did something which, as he was aware, would have as a virtually certain consequence the elimination of his own humanity. Either way, his action failed to express respect for the incomparable worth of his humanity. It sent the message that its value was not as great as the value of that of the four other soldiers taken together. So, according to RFH, PFC McGinnis' action was wrong.

A second case also shows that the Kantian account delivers implausible results. Suppose that a law-abiding journalist has discovered widespread financial improprieties in a large company. He has a well-grounded suspicion that a security officer employed by this company aims to kill him in order to keep him from revealing what he knows. The officer follows him into an enclosed alley and approaches him with knife raised. The journalist tries, to no avail, to reason with him. He then takes out a gun and yells at the officer to stop. But he continues to move forward, now just a step away. The journalist reflects in a flash that the officer is a former special forces soldier and an expert in hand-to-hand combat. He concludes, very reasonably, that if he doesn't shoot to kill, he is very unlikely to escape from the situation alive. If the journalist intentionally kills the officer in this case, he acts in self-defence and his action is morally permissible, or so many of us believe. But, in shooting and killing the officer, the journalist would not express respect for the officer's humanity.

In order to see this, consider first a case of intentionally killing (and thus destroying the humanity of) an innocent, non-threatening person who wishes to remain alive. Doing so would express disrespect for the value of her humanity. It would convey a message that her humanity falls short of having unconditional and incomparable value. But now note that the value of the security officer's humanity neither disappears nor at all diminishes when he acts as a malicious aggressor. That it maintains its full value is just part of what it means to say that it has unconditional value in the Kantian sense. In destroying the officer's humanity, the journalist is destroying something no less valuable than the humanity of an innocent, non-threatening person. If someone's killing the innocent person expresses disrespect for the value of her humanity, then

<sup>6</sup> Arlington National Cemetery website, 'Ross A. McGinnis: Specialist, United States Army', arlingtoncemetery.net/ramcginnis.htm (accessed 20 July 2010).

the journalist's killing the officer expresses disrespect for the value of his. So, according to the respect-expression view, the journalist's shooting and killing the officer in self-defence is morally impermissible.

A final example illustrates a further implausible implication of the Kantian account. We have one indivisible life-saving drug and two patients who desperately want and need it: a twenty-year-old and a seventy-year-old. It is our job to allocate the drug. Each person has a claim on it in the relatively weak sense that it would be wrong for us not to give it to her on morally arbitrary grounds (for example, because we did not like her home town). Finally, neither patient is morally responsible for her need of the drug in any way that would affect her claim on it. The patient who does not get the drug will die. If the younger person gets the drug, she will thrive for decades; if the older person gets the drug, she will thrive for a couple of years but then die of natural causes.

Many of us are convinced that the younger patient should get the drug. One might suggest that she should get it on the grounds that the older patient has already had a full human life, that is, her 'fair innings'. But giving it to her on that basis would send a message contrary to the notion that humanity has dignity. For it would suggest that an instance of rational nature that has endured long enough to constitute a full life has less value than an instance that has been around for a shorter time. But this suggestion contradicts the Kantian notion that the value of humanity is unconditional.

The self-sacrifice case tries to illustrate implausible implications that Kant's account has by virtue of its holding that persons have incomparable value. The drug allocation and self-defence cases attempt to demonstrate implausible implications it has by virtue of holding that persons have unconditional value. Of course, defenders of the Kantian account might try to show that it does not have these implications.7 Or they might contend that the implications are not implausible after all. Finally, they might acknowledge that the account has implausible implications but argue that it has fewer than any rival accounts. But that the Kantian account of dignity appears to clash with widely held judgments of reflective common sense is a difficulty with it that needs to be addressed.

It is worth keeping in mind that accounts of dignity different from the one we have examined can also find inspiration in Kant (Cummiskey 2008). For example, one might interpret or reconstruct Kant's notion of dignity to invoke fundamentally not a value, but rather a set of prescriptions that we are rationally compelled to use in deliberations regarding policies on permissible or impermissible ways of behaving (Hill 2003; 2012). The prescriptions are higher level principles that govern decisions regarding which lower level principles to adopt. According to one such account, these prescriptions include, but are not limited to, the following: first, we 'must treat persons only in ways that we could in principle justify to them as well as to all other rational persons

7 For a far more detailed defence of the conclusion that RFH indeed has implausible implications in the self-sacrifice and self-defence cases, see Kerstein 2009a.

who take an appropriately impartial perspective' (Hill 2003: 25). Second, the value of persons is not commensurable, so we must not compare or weigh the value of one against that of others. And, third, persons have a moral status that limits how we may use them, even to realize good ends (Hill 2003: 25). The normative implications of these prescriptions are far from obvious. But they seem to be problematic in some of the sort of cases we have examined. Consider a principle that would permit, but not require, a person to voluntarily kill himself (for example, by jumping on a grenade) in order to maximize the preservation of persons. It seems as if this principle would run afoul of the second prescription; for it treats the value of persons as commensurable. But perhaps further development of this rational prescription approach to dignity would show how it could allow for principles permitting self-sacrifice.

There might be yet other ways of reconstructing a Kantian notion of dignity. Inspired by the Formula of Humanity, one might-hold that dignity is a special status held by persons, according to which they ought not to be treated merely as means, but ought to be treated as having a special worth.8 This worth might in part be defined as *transcendent*, rather than as incomparable (Kerstein 2013). To treat persons as having transcendent value would be to treat them as having a value that transcends that of non-persons: a value that no amount of anything that is not a person can equal. A requirement to treat persons as having transcendent value would be consistent with saving more persons rather than fewer on the grounds that more have greater value than fewer. Such an account of dignity might be consistent with what many of us take to be warranted conclusions, for example, that PFC McGinnis' action was heroic, not wrong. Of course, even if the account harmonizes with reflective common sense in this case, it might clash with it in a whole range of others. Far more work would need to be done in order to defend the view that the account was worthy of acceptance.9

#### **References**

- Christiano, T. 2008. 'Two Conceptions of the Dignity of Persons', *Jahrbuch f¨ur Recht und Ethik* 16: 101–26
- Cummiskey, D. 2008. 'Dignity, Contractualism and Consequentialism', *Utilitas* 20: 383– 408
- Dean, R. 2006. *The Value of Humanity in Kant's Moral Theory*. Oxford University Press
- Denis, L. 2000. 'Kant's Conception of Duties Regarding Animals: Reconstruction and Reconsideration', *History of Philosophy Quarterly* 17: 405–23
- Hill, T., Jr. 1992. 'Humanity as an End in Itself', in *Dignity and Practical Reason in Kant's Moral Theory*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 38–57
- 8 It is not obvious what the notion of treating another merely as a means amounts to. For specifications of the notion, see Kerstein 2009b and 2013.
- 9 I try to make progress on this task in Kerstein 2013.

- 2003. 'Treating Criminals as Ends in Themselves', *Jahrbuch f¨ur Recht und Ethik* 11: 17–36
2012. *Virtue, Rules, and Justice*. Oxford University Press

- Kant, I. 1996a. *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. M. Gregor, in *Immanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press (the page numbers given in the text above refer to Kant [1902–] volume IV)
	- 1996b. *The Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. M. Gregor, in *Immanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press (the page numbers given in the text above refer to Kant [1902–] volume VI)
- Kerstein, S. 2001. 'Korsgaard's Kantian Arguments for the Value of Humanity', *Canadian Journal of Philosophy* 31: 23–52
	- 2009a. 'Death, Dignity, and Respect', *Social Theory and Practice* 35: 505–30
	- 2009b. 'Treating Others Merely as Means', *Utilitas* 21: 163–80
	- 2013. *How to Treat Persons*. Oxford University Press
- Korsgaard, C. 1996. 'Kant's Formula of Humanity', in *Creating the Kingdom of Ends*. Cambridge University Press, 106–32
- O'Neill, O. 1998. 'Kant on Duties Regarding Nonrational Nature II', *Aristotelian Society: Supplementary Volume* 72: 211–28
- Paton, H. J. 1967. *The Categorical Imperative*. New York: Harper & Row
- Schonecker, D., and Wood, A. ¨ 2003. *Immanuel Kant 'Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten': Ein Einf¨uhrender Kommentar*. Paderborn: Verlag Ferdinand Schoningh ¨
- Sensen, O. 2009. 'Kant's Conception of Human Dignity', *Kant-Studien* 100: 309–31 2011. *Kant on Human Dignity*. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter
- Warren, M. A. 1997. *Moral Status*. Oxford University Press
- Wood, A. 1999. *Kant's Ethical Thought*. Cambridge University Press 2008. *Kantian Ethics*. Cambridge University Press