### Human dignity in Catholic thought 

DAVID HOLLENBACH, SJ

In the years since the Second Vatican Council (1962–5) the Roman Catholic community has emerged as a vigorous global advocate of human rights. The recent social teachings of popes and bishops, as well as the social engagement undertaken by individual Catholics and by Catholic associations, have increasingly been formulated in terms of human rights. Catholic thought and advocacy grounds its appeal to human rights in an affirmation that human dignity is the most basic standard to which all personal behaviour and social institutions are accountable. Pope John XXIII affirmed that the modern Catholic tradition of social thought is controlled 'by one basic theme – an unshakable affirmation and defence of the dignity and rights of the human person' (1964: 233). This commitment has led the Catholic community to become a significant force for the promotion of human dignity and human rights in Latin America, former Warsaw Pact countries such as Poland, Asian nations like the Philippines and South Korea, and increasingly in African countries. Because of these developments the late Samuel Huntington concluded that the post-Second Vatican Council Catholic church had become one of the strongest worldwide forces for human dignity, human rights and democracy (Huntington 1991).

#### **Shifts in Catholic thought**

This is a remarkable development. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Catholicism was a significant source of opposition to both human rights and democracy. For example, in 1832, Pope Gregory XVI argued against the fundamental right to freedom of conscience, declaring it to be a form of 'insanity' (in Latin, *deliramentum*) (Neuner and Dupuis 1998: No. 1002). Just over a century later, the Second Vatican Council affirmed that 'the right to religious freedom has its foundation in the very dignity of the human person, as this dignity is known through the revealed word of God and by reason itself' (1965a: No. 2). More broadly, the Council committed the Catholic community to support for the full array of human rights by declaring that, 'by virtue of the gospel committed to it, the Church proclaims the rights of the human person' (1965b: No. 41).

This dramatic shift was occasioned by the way Catholic experience in the twentieth century led the church gradually to recognize that the promotion of human rights was increasingly a precondition for the protection of the dignity of the person called for by the church's religious mission. From the time of the French Revolution into the mid-twentieth century, church leadership had seen freedom of conscience and freedom of religion as linked with a secularizing agenda that sought to marginalize the church from active engagement in public life. Indeed, the church's identification with the *ancien r´egime* had given eighteenth-century liberal thinkers good grounds for maintaining that the social change they sought required reducing the public influence of Catholicism. In a parallel way, some socialist thinkers of the nineteenth century, especially Marx and Lenin, saw the Catholic conviction that humanity's ultimate hope lay beyond history as reducing believers' commitment to struggle for economic justice (religion as the 'opium of the people'), and as an impediment to the revolution they sought. Thus, the church adopted a defensive stance against both liberal and socialist revolutions. In fact, some forms of French liberalism, such as those manifest in the 1790 Civil Constitution of the Clergy and the Third Republic's1905law of separation of church and state, explicitly sought to reduce the church's public influence and even to subordinate the church to the state. Soviet Marxist-Leninism also set out to reduce the influence of religion. Thus, Catholicism had good reasons for seeing some aspects of eighteenth-century liberalism and nineteenth-century socialism as its adversaries. The result was the church's suspicious stance towards key elements of the democratic and economic transformations of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century modernity, which led to its opposition to key parts of the modern human rights agenda.

Nevertheless, there were also aspects of the Catholic response to modernity that brought to the surface the Catholic tradition's deeper commitment to human dignity, thus opening the way for the strong support for human rights developed much more fully at the Second Vatican Council. Pope Leo XIII recognized that the Catholic resistance to the subordination of church to state that had emerged in French liberalism and Soviet Marxism could best be expressed by affirming that the human person transcends control by the institutions of government. In Leo's words, 'man precedes the state' (1891: No. 7). He argued, therefore, that governmental and legal institutions are to be assessed in light of their respect for the freedom and dignity of persons. The power of the state, including the power of the majority in a democratic state, should be limited by its duty to respect the free exercise of religion and to provide space for an active church role in public life. Leo XIII's desire to protect the freedom and selfinterest of the Catholic community, therefore, overlapped with his insistence on a limited state, with his insistence that the dignity of the person transcends the power of the state, and thus with an incipient argument for the human rights of the person (Murray 1953).

Similarly, Leo XIII responded to the threats that Marxist socialism was raising for the church by proposing an alternative approach to securing justice for the working class and for the poor. In doing so, he launched what has become the modern Catholic approach to arguing that the justice or injustice of economic decisions are to be evaluated in light of their impact on the dignity of persons. Economic institutions as well as the power of those who control them are accountable for their impact on the dignity of all those they affect, especially for their effects on the dignity of the most vulnerable members of society. In Leo's words, 'No man may with impunity outrage the dignity which God Himself treats with great reverence' (1891: No. 40). Indeed, employers have a responsibility not to treat workers as 'mere instruments for money making' but to respect their dignity by paying them a living wage and by recognizing their right to organize labour unions (Leo XIII 1891: No. 42; see Nos. 43-47). Thus, the dignity of workers is at the root of twentieth-century Catholicism's significant support for the labour movement and for the rights of working people. These initiatives of Leo XIII were carried forward by Pius XI in his 1931 encyclical, *Quadragesimo Anno*, which took them to a deeper level in light of the economic crisis that had begun in 1929. They led to the development of what has come to be called 'social Catholicism' – a tradition that appeals to human dignity as the basis for its strong commitment to social justice (Hollenbach 1979: 41–106).

#### **Basis of human dignity in recent Catholic thought**

The articulation of human dignity as the foundation of the Catholic tradition's commitment to justice and human rights became most fully explicit at the Second Vatican Council. *Gaudium et Spes*, the Council's Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern World, grounds the overarching vision of recent Catholic social teaching in the themes of the dignity of the human person, the importance of the vocation to community in solidarity, and the religious significance of this-worldly activity. Each of these themes is supported both by distinctively Christian theological warrants as well as by secular warrants based on reason.

Human dignity is theologically supported by the biblical teaching in the book of Genesis that human beings are created in the image and likeness of God (Genesis 1:26). Persons possess a worth that deserves to be treated with the reverence shown to that which is holy. As made in God's likeness, human beings possess a sacredness analogous to the holiness of God. When we look upon the face of a human being we stand in the presence of the sacred. Thus, mistreating a human person is a kind of sacrilege. In the thirteenth century, Thomas Aquinas carried this biblical argument a step further when he affirmed that human beings are the only creatures God has created as valuable in themselves. They alone in all the universe are 'governed by divine providence for their own sakes' (Thomas Aquinas 1956: 116). This theological affirmation comes quite close to Kant's philosophical argument that persons are ends in themselves and never to be treated only as means to the attainment of the purposes of others or of society as a whole. Further, Christian revelation affirms that, because human beings are redeemed and recreated in Christ, believers are called to esteem human dignity even more highly (John XXIII 1963: No. 10; Vatican Council II 1965b: No. 22). Thus, the church's mission to defend human dignity and rights flows from the heart of Christian faith.

At the same time, human dignity can be recognized by all human beings, and makes claims upon all, both Christian and non-Christian. The Second Vatican Council offered several secular warrants for its affirmation of the dignity of the person, very much in line with Catholicism's long-standing, natural law-based conviction that fundamental ethical responsibilities can be grasped by human reason and by philosophical reflection on what it is to be human. First, the Council affirmed that the dignity of the human person is discernible in the transcendent power of the human mind. Through the intellect, human beings transcend the material universe, and the mind's capacity to share in divine wisdom gives humans a worth analogous to God's. Second, human dignity is manifest in the capacity of the human conscience to search for moral truth and to adhere to it when it has been found. Obedience to the dictates of conscience – which is the deepest core and sanctuary of a person – 'is the very dignity of the human person'. Third, dignity is also evident in the excellence of human liberty. Freedom is 'an exceptional sign of the divine image within the human person'. The dignity of freedom requires that persons act in accord with their free choice and that they seek to direct their freedom through knowledge of the true good (Vatican Council II 1965b: Nos. 15–17).

These three secular warrants for human dignity – the transcendence of the mind, the sacredness of conscience, and the excellence of liberty – are all aspects of the power of human reason which is a prime manifestation of the likeness of humans to God. They lead to what has been called a *substantialist* interpretation of the image of God in the human person. They are called 'substantialist' because they are aspects of the very substance of the person and inherently present within the person. This can be contrasted with interpretations of the image of God that have been called 'relational' and 'functional', which are also affirmed in Catholic thought (Middleton 2005). The *relational* interpretation sees the image of God in persons as a reflection of the fact that the God in whom Christians believe is a Trinitarian union of three persons – each related with the other divine persons in mutual love. The God of Christian faith is not a monadic being isolated in sublime solitude. The One God of monotheistic Christian faith is simultaneously a Trinity of related persons. Since God is thus radically relational, so are human persons. As the Council put it, 'God did not create the human being as a solitary . . . For by his innermost nature the human being is a social being, and unless he relates himself to others he can neither live nor develop his potential' (Vatican Council II 1965b: No. 12; International Theological Commission 2004).

This theological understanding of human dignity as a relational reality also has secular warrants. For example, the Council cites Thomas Aquinas' appropriation of Aristotle's philosophical defence of the 'social nature' of the human person, which implies that the development of the person and the advance of society 'hinge on each other' and that each person 'stands completely in need of social life' (Vatican Council II 1965b: No. 25). Thus, on both theological and secular grounds the dignity of the person can only be achieved when persons enter into fraternity and solidarity with each other. Human dignity is not realized by persons acting autonomously on their own but only through collaboration and solidarity. An individualistic ethic is thus inadequate in light of Catholicism's relational understanding of human dignity. Protection of human dignity and realization of the common good go together. Neither personal flourishing nor communal well-being can be secured without the other.

This relational understanding of the image of God and of human dignity has important practical implications, particularly for the way human rights are understood. During the Cold War, the West was inclined to conceive human rights largely in individualistic terms and to give priority to the civil and political rights: to freedom of belief, speech, and association, as well as due process of law. The negative rights not to be interfered with often took primacy in the West in its ideological struggle with the Soviet bloc. In contrast, Eastern bloc nations and some in the Southern hemisphere adopted ideologies stressing social interdependence and the priority of community provision over individual initiative. This led to granting priority to social and economic rights such as those to adequate food, work and housing.

The simultaneous Catholic affirmation of both the substantialist and relational understandings of dignity, however, denies the legitimacy of both poles of this conflict. Neither individualistic understandings that see human rights primarily as rights to be left alone nor collectivist approaches that subordinate persons to the community in a totalitarian way are adequate. The Catholic tradition holds that opposition between individual freedoms on the one hand and mutual solidarity in society on the other is a false dichotomy. Persons can live in dignity only when they live in a community of freedom – a community in which both personal initiative and social solidarity are valued as essential aspects of human dignity. The give-and-take of dialogue is an intellectual manifestation of such a linkage of personal initiative and social solidarity. This linkage also has institutional dimensions; it will be realized only when persons have both political space for action (civil and political rights) and the material and institutional prerequisites of communal life that make such action possible (social and economic rights). Thus, both civil-political and social-economic rights are required if human dignity is to be respected in its multiple aspects.

Third, the image of God in persons has been given a *functional* interpretation. Just as God has brought the world of nature into being and sustains and governs it, human beings as images of God also exercise a creative, sustaining and governing role in the world. The book of Genesis speaks of the human person as being given a role of dominion analogous to God's dominion over creation. In the face of contemporary environmental and ecological challenges, however, it is important to note that recent biblical scholarship sees this dominion as a responsibility to care for and sustain the created order, not to dominate or, much less, to destroy it. Humans are in God's image by being delegated by God to exercise the kind of care for creation that God's love for all creatures leads to.

This understanding of the *imago Dei*, and thus human dignity, should therefore lead to a strong sense of the interconnection between humans and the natural world and of responsibility to protect the well-being of the entire biosphere. Contrary to some interpretations of the implications of Christian thought for environmental issues, commitment to the distinctive worth of human persons ought to lead to a strong ethic of ecological responsibility (Benedict XVI 2010a: No. 6). Recent Catholic discussions of human dignity, particularly those of Pope Benedict XVI, have picked up on this theme and adopted a notably 'green' orientation. These discussions lead to an understanding of human dignity that supports 'third-generation' human rights such as the right to 'an environment of a quality that permits a life of dignity and well-being', and a 'responsibility to protect and improve the environment for present and future generations'.1

This support for environmental integrity and sustainability as a requirement of human dignity implies that the person who possesses dignity is a bodily, biological as well as spiritual, being. Recent Catholic discussions of human dignity have stressed that the biblical understanding of the person rejects mind– body dualism. The dignity of the person is not simply the dignity of a spiritual soul or of what Kant would call a 'noumenal' self, transcending empirical and bodily existence. Human bodiliness, including the reality of human sexuality, is an aspect of the image of God in the human person. Respect for the dignity of the person thus calls for respect for the person's biological needs such as those for food, shelter and healthcare. It also requires respect for the sexual differentiation of male and female, including the equality of man and woman (International Theological Commission 2004: Nos. 26–38).

#### **A living tradition**

All these considerations show that the Catholic understanding of human dignity exists within a living tradition that is open to development and change. In earlier stages of this tradition, social practices such as restrictions on religious freedom and even slavery and torture were accepted. The Catholic tradition and its official representatives regarded such practices as legitimate and even morally necessary for the defence of human dignity. Today, however, Catholic thought judges these practices to be fundamental violations of human dignity and human rights, and thus to be gravely immoral (Vatican Council II 1965b: No. 27; Noonan 2005).

1 United Nations Environment Programme, Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, www.unep.org/Documents. Multilingual/Default.asp?DocumentID=97&ArticleID=1503&l=en (accessed 6 July 2010).

These developments in Catholic thought have occurred as a result of a living interaction between the normative sources of Catholic identity, including the Bible and key doctrinal beliefs, and the ongoing social experience of the Catholic community reflected upon by practical reason. For example, the church's lived experience of the denial of religious freedom by the Soviet state under Stalin led Popes Pius XII and John XXIII to re-examine the tradition's earlier conclusion that support for religious freedom was part of a secularizing agenda that threatened the church's role in public life. Practical reflection on the experience of denial of religious freedom then led the Second Vatican Council to recognize that the freedom to express one's religious convictions in public is an essential condition for the protection and realization of human dignity. Thus, through a sort of back-and-forth movement between normative Catholic beliefs and lived experience, notable developments have occurred in both the more theoretical Catholic understanding of human dignity and in more practical Catholic commitments to protect human rights.

In this way, Catholicism has come to be a participant in what John Rawls has called an 'overlapping consensus' on a public philosophy of human dignity and human rights. In such a consensus, people from diverse religions or cultures reach agreement on the ethical standards for the institutions that structure their lives together. They discover within their own particular traditions adequate grounds for affirming a set of basic moral principles that persons from other traditions can also affirm for their own reasons. Such a consensus was attained in the practical agreement reached by the drafters of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

It can be asked, however, whether this agreement on human rights, and Catholic participation in it, was in fact simply a fortuitous convergence occasioned by the experience of the grave abuses of Nazi genocide and the violence of the twentieth century's world wars. A consensus that arises fortuitously could equally well evanesce if the circumstances that occasioned it were to change. The Universal Declaration did not rest on a philosophical agreement on why human rights should be supported or a metaphysical agreement about the meaning of human dignity (Maritain 1949: 9). This leaves open the question of whether agreement to the Declaration, including agreement by the Catholic community, might disappear if historical conditions become sufficiently different from those that led to its drafting.

To address this question it is important to distinguish between a chance convergence of Catholic thought with other traditions and an experience-based agreement on the moral demands of human dignity shaped by the conclusions of practical reason. 'Practical reason', of course, can mean several things. On one level it could be an instrumental calculus of self-interest. Understood this way, practical agreement to the requirements of human dignity and rights would mean that the Catholic community has become convinced that the selfinterests of the church will be best achieved under a human rights regime. Such an interest-based practical agreement would disappear if it became clear that human rights challenge some significant Catholic interests or important aspects of Catholic self-understanding. Practical consensus of this type is simply an expression of what the particular tradition involved already believes. On the other hand, a second form of practical reason goes beyond this sort of selfinterest. It claims to have attained true insight into ways in which practical action will promote the genuine human good. In fact, recent Catholic thought, especially that of John XXIII and the Second Vatican Council, affirms support for human rights in this way. Human rights are not simply supportive of the practical self-interests of the church, nor are they just congenial expressions of already existing convictions of the Catholic tradition. Rather, the support for human rights at the Second Vatican Council in fact challenged existing church traditions and what had been seen as the self-interests of the church. Human rights affirmed in this way were able to challenge existing patterns of Catholic thought and life precisely because they were seen as expressing true insights into the human good. Because of the deep Catholic claim to be promoting the human good, the tradition was thus compelled to change.

This way of understanding Catholicism's entrance into the contemporary consensus on human dignity and human rights provides a way of understanding past developments in the tradition. But it also suggests that we can expect further developments in the Catholic understanding of human dignity and rights in the future. In particular, very recent church teachings on the equality of men and women are often accompanied by an affirmation of a complementarity of male and female gender roles that leads to a rejection of some of the rights claimed by persons involved in same-sex relationships. Similarly, recent church teachings reject some innovative forms of medical and technological support for human reproduction as threats to human dignity (International Theological Commission 2004: Nos. 81–94). Clearly, support for same-sex relationships and for some forms of technologically assisted reproduction would require notable departure from aspects of the Catholic moral tradition. Whether such a development in the tradition is called for cannot be determined here. But in the past, Catholic moral understandings have clearly developed and changed in a number of other domains when practical reason indicated that change would serve the human good and promote human dignity. At present, there are notable disputes concerning the appropriate direction for Catholic thought in the domain of sexuality and reproduction if it is to be supportive of human dignity in these important areas of human life. The past experience of development within the tradition suggests that change should not be ruled out in the way Catholic thought assesses the relation among human dignity, sex and reproduction. Rather, we need careful reflection on the human experience of how human dignity is being affected by new practices in these areas.

It will not be only Catholic thought and practice, of course, that will be led to change by the influence of emerging social, political and technological realities on our understanding of the requirements of human dignity. Other traditions, both religious and secular, may need to change as well. In particular, Catholicism's strong emphasis on the social nature of the human person challenges the individualistic tendencies of some approaches to human rights. For example, freedom of personal initiative in the economic sphere is a right that should be stressed if state control stifles human dignity. But markets should also be regulated when this is needed to insure that the dignity of the poor and marginal members of society is protected, especially when these markets have increasingly global reach (Benedict XVI 2010b). Human dignity thus raises ongoing challenges for all traditions of moral reflection. We can expect Catholicism to be an active participant in the efforts to respond to these challenges that lie ahead.

#### **References**

- Benedict XVI. 2010a. 'If You Want to Cultivate Peace, Protect Creation', message for the World Day of Peace, 1 January 2010, www.vatican.va/holy father/benedict xvi/ messages/peace/documents/hf ben-xvi mes 20091208 xliii-world-day-peace en. html (accessed 5 July 2010)
	- 2010b. 'Address to the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences', 30 April 2010, www. vatican.va/holy father/benedict xvi/speeches/2010/april/documents/hf ben-xvi spe 20100430 scienze-sociali en.html (accessed 25 May 2010)
- Hollenbach, D. 1979. *Claims in Conflict: Retrieving and Renewing the Catholic Human Rights Tradition*. New York: Paulist Press
- Huntington, S. 1991. 'Religion and the Third Wave', *National Interest* 24: 29–42
- International Theological Commission. 2004. *Communion and Stewardship: Human Persons Created in the Image of God*. www.vatican.va/roman curia/congregations/ cfaith/cti documents/rc con cfaith doc 20040723 communion-stewardship en. html (accessed 19 July 2010)
- John XXIII. 1963. 'Pacem in Terris (Peace on Earth)', in D. J. O'Brien and T. A. Shannon (eds.), *Catholic Social Thought: The Documentary Heritage*. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books [1992], 131–62
	- 1964. 'A Preview of Mater et Magistra', in The Staff of the Pope Speaks Magazine (eds.), *The Encyclicals and Other Messages of John XXIII*, Washington, DC: TPS Press
- Leo XIII. 1891. '*Rerum novarum* (On Capital and Labor)', www.vatican.va/holy father/ leo xiii/encyclicals/documents/hf l-xiii enc 15051891 rerum-novarum en.html
- Maritain, J. 1949. 'Introduction', in UNESCO (ed.), *Human Rights: Comments and Interpretations*, New York: Columbia University Press
- Middleton, J. R. 2005. *The Liberating Image: The Imago Dei in Genesis 1*. Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos Press
- Murray, J. C. 1953. 'Leo XIII: Separation of Church and State', *Theological Studies* 14: 145–214
- Neuner, J., and Dupuis, J. (eds.). 1998. *The Christian Faith in the Doctrinal Documents of the Catholic Church*, 6th revised and enlarged edn, New York: Alba House
- Noonan, J. T. 2005. *A Church That Can and Cannot Change: The Development of Catholic Moral Teaching*. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press

Thomas Aquinas. 1956. *Summa contra gentiles*, trans. V. J. Bourke. New York: Doubleday Vatican Council II. 1965a. 'Dignitatis humanae (Declaration on Religious Freedom)', in

W. Abbott and J. Gallagher (eds.), *Documents of Vatican II*, New York: America Press [1966], 675–96

- 1965b. 'Gaudium et spes (Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern World)', in W. Abbott and J. Gallagher (eds.), *Documents of Vatican II*, New York: America Press [1966], 199–308