### Dignity and the Other: dignity and the phenomenological tradition

PETER ATTERTON

A fundamental claim of phenomenology is that the meaning of something is not given to us in the manner of abstract theoretical knowledge but arises out of our *concrete*, non-theoretical dealings with the world. Phenomenology rejects the idea that we need to find *a priori* or metaphysical grounds to justify what, by remaining faithful to our deepest experiential evidence, we in a certain sense already know to be true. It carefully attends to the nature of consciousness as actually experienced, not as represented by the tradition or abstract philosophizing or scientific theory. This leads to a method in philosophy: the careful description of things or their meanings as they *appear* to a 'transcendentally reduced' (Husserl 1991: 34 *passim*) consciousness, i.e. minus all prejudices and theoretical assumptions, while taking their very manner of appearance into consideration. But how does phenomenology shed light on something like the meaning of human dignity? If human dignity is not something I have to infer but something directly intuited in experience, how is it that human beings inhabit my experience in such a way that they present themselves to me as beings worthy of respect, possessing certain rights and generating correlative duties and obligations, which are essential components of their recognition?

Emmanuel Levinas' ´ *phenomenological ethics* suggests the possibility of an answer to these questions by grounding the idea of human rights and dignity in the relationship with the other person he calls 'the Other' ('*Autrui*'). Levinas ´ takes the position that dignity and rights are attributes that persons could not fail to have *as human persons*, and that those attributes present themselves to me in the concrete and immediate encounter he calls 'the face-to-face'. His view is not simply reducible to the claim that as a rational agent I am forced to recognize the rationality of others. He holds, for instance, that the respect for universal rights would be impossible *but for a prior attachment to the Other that precedes reason and autonomy*, and which is made possible by the *demand* that comes from the Other, a call on me to set aside my self-preoccupations and to concern myself with the Other instead. Levinas' endorsement of the rights of man goes ´ hand in hand with his theory of responsibility for the Other. Roughly put, this is the theory that I, as an ethically motivated individual, find myself responsible for taking care of the needs of the Other prior to consciousness and choice. If Levinas is correct in his claim that 'the Rights of Man are originally the rights ´ of the other man' (Lev´ inas 1999b: 149), then this has startling and far-reaching consequences, not only for global justice and politics (overseas development, aid, etc.) but also for the classic Enlightenment problem of the justification of human rights and the meaning of human dignity. These are sufficient reasons for us to take Levinas' 'phenomenology of the rights of man' (L ´ evinas ´ 1994: 125) very seriously.

#### **Phenomenology of human dignity and rights**

For Lev´ inas, what separates phenomenology from traditional philosophy and science is its enormous potential for recognizing the distinctly *human*: 'No one combated the dehumanization of the Real better than Husserl [the father of phenomenology], the dehumanization which is produced when one extends the categories proper to mathematized matter to the totality of our experience . . . Phenomenology has not only permitted the "de-thingifying", the "dereifying" of the human being, but also the humanizing of things' (Levinas ´ 1998c: 131–2). If phenomenology is to show how it is that we can come by a 'de-reified' conception of human being, it must meet two demands: (1) It must describe concrete human phenomena while 'bracketing' antecedent misconceptions stemming from ideological or scientific prejudices about what human beings *must* be like in theory; and (2) it should also teach us how *another human being* can at least be thinkable or putatively recognized. For Levinas these are ´ the same demands insofar as the proper meaning of the human lies not in its showing itself to me as an object of knowledge but implicitly refers to the first-hand experience of the other human being in a relationship 'face-to-face'. For Levinas, the fundamental recognition of the humanity and dignity of the ´ Other just is the *recognition* that he or she *has a face*. The central problem of Levinas' philosophy is that of explaining how the face is able to signify the pres- ´ ence of the other human being outside of knowledge and comprehension. This requires one to adopt the first-person perspective of one who stands *within* the face-to-face encounter with another human being rather than the position of a neutral third party who stands outside the relationship looking in. For Levinas ´ the interpersonal face-to-face constitutes a relationship not of perception or knowledge but one of ethics and responsibility. Levinas is not trying to explain ´ how ethics is possible by appealing to a preliminary awareness of the others: the term 'ethics' is but a label for accomplishment of the relationship with the Other insofar as 'the very significance of the face and of the original speaking that asks for me, holds me in question and awakes me or gives rise to my response or my responsibility' (Levinas ´ 1998a: 167).

When Levinas explicitly defines what it is that the face 'says' to provoke ´ responsibility, what emerges is the assertion of an original 'right' *against me* of the right to life: *Thou shalt not kill*. This fundamental right to life comprises more than simply the negative right of non-interference; it comprehends also positive duties, including the positive obligation to *maintain* the other's life. Lev´ inas clarifies its meaning thus: '"Thou shalt not kill" – means then "Thou shalt cause thy neighbor to live"' (Levinas ´ 1999a: 127) ('*"Tu ne tuera point" – cela signifie donc "tu feras vivre le prochain"* '). Thus, for Levinas, the presence of ´ the Other's face is the first condition for the possibility of recognizing the right of the Other to the material means of his or her existence. As Levinas says in his ´ *magnum opus*, *Totality and Infinity* (1961):

This regard that supplicates and demands – that can supplicate only because it demands – deprived of everything because having a right to everything and that one recognizes in giving . . . this regard is precisely the epiphany of the face as face. The nakedness of the face is destituteness. To recognize the Other is to recognize a hunger. To recognize the Other is to give. (Levinas ´ 1969: 75)

When confronted with the face of a fellow human being who is hungry (or in need), I immediately feel morally constrained to feed, clothe, etc. him or her. This sense of moral constraint is not in virtue of some rational decision process or procedure whereby I recognize that I must give adequate consideration to others if I am to act on principles that all autonomous rational beings as such could adopt. Indeed, I do not *act on* principle at all; rather, my will is already predisposed to act in response to the hungry Other prior to rational acceptance. This is how*phenomenologically* I experience the Other's face, not as a perceptible thing, but as a *demand* put to me in the form of an urgent requirement to take care of his or her welfare needs.

#### **The paradox of 'equal dignity'**

It is interesting to compare what Lev´ inas says about the face of the Other being 'deprived of everything because having a right to everything' ('*priv´e de tout parce que ayant droit `a tout*') with the first sentence of Article 1 of the Declaration: 'All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.' The latter is usually taken to mean that *all* human beings are born with equal rights and freedoms because of their inherent dignity. But, if Levinas is correct, then ´ the Other would appear to have more rights than I have – 'a right to everything' no less – precisely insofar as we stand in a relationship with each other face-to-face.

Levinas' exposition is very informal but it is clear that it is merely a variant ´ of the argument enshrined in the Declaration. The difference is that Levinas ´ does not pretend to derive the dignity of the Other from his or her species membership. This becomes apparent once we take note of the paradox that lies implicitly at the basis of the Declaration, namely, that the human rights that all people have *by virtue of their humanity* are also meant to express the absolute uniqueness of each and every human being. As Levinas puts it in an important ´ essay appearing in 1985 entitled 'The Rights of Man and the Rights of the Other':

The rights of man manifest the uniqueness or the absolute of the person, despite his or her subsumption under the category of the human species, or because of that subsumption. This is the paradox, or mystery, or novelty of the human being. (Levinas ´ 1994: 117–18)

According to Lev´ inas, humans are distinctive among beings by virtue of the fact that, while it is possible to view them in purely *ontological* terms as mere instances of a universal ('human being'), in which their 'singularity vanishes' (Levinas ´ 1969:59), it is not possible *ethically* to do so, which requires them to be viewed and treated as unrepeatable and incomparable individuals in their own right. Levinas is at pains to demonstrate that a human person always exists in ´ the mode of a *concrete* humanity as something that is uniquely and irreducibly hers and not to be confounded with the humanity of her neighbour. What is fundamental to individuals, and which cannot be made common to others of the same species, is precisely interiority or *subjectivity*. Levinas writes: 'We have ´ always known that it is impossible to form an idea of the human totality, for men have an inner life closed to him who does, however, grasp the comprehensive movements of human groups' (Levinas ´ 1969: 58). The human person does not have subjective interiority as something over and above his or her humanity, but rather as something that *is* the person and nothing else besides. It is because there is no Being of the person that may go un-actualized in subjectivity that each and every individual is unique in the sense of '*the only one* of his kind' (Levinas ´ 1994: 117). Each person, then, is her own species, and thus the only possible member of the species, and not a mere specimen of humanity. While it might still strike us as puzzling how Levinas can still speak of a 'human species', ´ the point to bear in mind is that Levinas is persuaded that being human – ´ or what he is inclined to refer to in French in the form of a non-anaphoric nominalized adjective '*l'humain*' (for example, Levinas ´ 1998a: 166) – can only be realized by *individuals* existing separately from one another, each in the context of his or her own subjective existence.

The Enlightenment thinker Kant we know likewise described 'dignity' ('*W¨urde*') as 'infinitely above all price, with which it cannot be brought into reckoning or comparison without, as it were, a profanation of its sanctity' (Kant 1983: 96). However, dignity, for Kant, resides not in the unique personal status of the person, but in the capacity to impose lawlikeness on one's actions by adopting principles that *any and all persons* can act on, which is why 'all respect for a person is properly only respect for the law . . . of which that person gives an example' (Kant 1983: 67n). For Levinas, by contrast, the inherent ´ dignity of persons resides in the putatively 'pathological' factor of their wills that Kant invoked to explain their 'unconquerable disinclination' (Kant 1983: 65) to submit to the authority of reason. Levinas asks rhetorically: 'Is it so ´ certain that the entire will is *practical reason* in the Kantian sense? Does not the will contain an incoercible part that cannot be obligated by the formalism of universality? And we might even wonder whether, Kant notwithstanding, that incoercible spontaneity, which bears witness both to the multiplicity of humans and the uniqueness of persons, is already pathology and sensibility and "ill will"' (Levinas ´ 1994: 122). Levinas thus takes the position that something in ´ *addition* to 'practical reason' is required to account for the difference between human beings, that reason is not the sole origin or justification for human rights, and that it is insufficient to qualify one for membership in the human family with all the rights and *duties* it entails. The 'human aspect of human rights'1 presupposes on the part of every member of the human family not only reason but compassion, sympathy and a sense of duty, the absence of which makes such membership of the human family questionable.

This is not to suggest that the dignity that Levinas argues is at the base of ´ human rights has no connection with reason, or that reason is dispensable when it comes to fully respecting and defending those rights. He speaks of 'science' and 'technology' as 'the first conditions for the factual implementation of the respect for the origins of the rights of men' (Levinas ´ 1994: 119). He harshly criticizes the influential Heideggerian critique of technology, which 'has become a comfortable rhetoric, forgetful of the responsibilities to which a "developing humanity" more and more numerous, calls and which, *without the development of technology, could not be fed*' (Levinas ´ 1998b: 9). And he is the first to admit the moral superiority of 'the egalitarian and just State, in which man is fulfilled (which is to be set up, and especially to be maintained)' (Levinas ´ 1981: 159). But Levinas is more prepared than his predecessor to expose what he sees as the ´ negative consequences of a total and exclusive reliance on standards of reason. What worries Levinas is the same 'dialectic of Enlightenment' that worried ´ Horkheimer and Adorno, namely, the propensity of reason itself to turn against the rationally emancipated individual. 'In a totally industrialized society or in a totalitarian society', writes Levinas, 'the rights of man are compromised by ´ the very practices for which they supplied the motivation. Mechanization and enslavement!' (Levinas ´ 1994: 121). The development of science and technology that was supposed to liberate human beings from nature and lead to human freedom brings with it 'inhuman requirements' 'that make up a new determinism, threatening the free movements that it was said to make possible' (Levinas ´

1 This phrase was used by Peng Chung Chang, part of the eight-member Drafting Committee of the UDHR, when he argued that 'stress should be laid upon the human aspect of human rights. A human being had to be constantly conscious of other men, in whose society he lived' (Angle and Svensson 2001: 207). Indeed, it was Chang who successfully argued for the inclusion of the Confucian concept of 'mindfulness of the other person' or (pinyin: ren) – translated as 'conscience' – in Art. ´ 1 of the UDHR ('All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.'). This was seen as a way of complementing the reference to *reason*, and striking a balance between rights and duties by underscoring that human beings should act with consideration for their fellow human beings (Angle and Svensson 2001: 209; see also Lindholm 1999: 43–4).

1994: 121). History has shown over and again that in the absence of an ethical counterweight the state has a propensity to subordinate the individual, using physical force if necessary, to increasing government and bureaucratic control. Hereby it ultimately destroys the conditions of its own legitimacy, namely, the protection of the individual: 'An end soon lost in the deployment of means brought to bear. And in the eventuality of a totalitarian state, man is repressed and a mockery made of the rights of man, and the promise of an ultimate return to the rights of man is postponed indefinitely' (Levinas ´ 1994: 123).

If modern forms of instrumental (or institutionalized) rationality, including politics and the state, are by themselves incapable of protecting human rights this is not because of any formal deficiencies, but because, according to Levinas, ´ 'the defense of the rights of man corresponds to a vocation *outside* the state, disposing, in a political society, of a kind of extraterritoriality . . . a vigilance totally different from political intelligence, a lucidity not limited to yielding before the formalism of universality, but upholding justice itself' (Levinas ´ 1994: 123). This 'extraterritoriality' is not to be construed literally to mean the famous Lockean state of nature preceding the state and presided over by a divine law that declares that all individuals should refrain from causing harm to each other's life, liberty, health, and property. *It is a phenomenological claim about how rights appear to me as one who is 'endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood*'. Rights do not appear to individuals possessed of reason alone ('To be I and not only an incarnation of a reason is precisely to be capable of seeing the offense of the offended, or the face' (Levinas ´ 1969: 247)), and are at risk of being repressed by the very political necessities for which they provide a justification. Rather, they appear in the ethical relation with the Other that Levinas calls 'fraternity' – 'in which the ´ responsibility of one-for-the-other is affirmed, and through which the rights of man manifest themselves *concretely* to consciousness as the rights of the other, for which I am answerable. Their original manifestation as rights of the other person and as the duty for an *I*, as my fraternal duty – that is as the phenomenology of the rights of man' (Levinas ´ 1994: 125).

#### **The obligation to help the needy**

One crucial article in the Declaration that is worth examining in this connection isArticle 25, which states that persons who cannot, through their own capacities, secure the conditions of an adequate livelihood have a right to social security:

Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.

The article fits well enough with the framework that seeks to outline those positive ('welfare') rights whose recognition is indispensable for the dignity, life and agency of persons. But the article does not tell us how this is to be ensured. When someone has a right to something then some agent or agency must have a corresponding duty to provide it. Whose duty then is it to ensure that someone has an adequate standard of living: food, clothing, housing, medical care and social services?

The Preamble to the Declaration makes it clear that 'Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms'.2 This implies that obligations to meet the dignity-threatening needs of rights-holders are originally *unallocated*, positive obligations awaiting the allocation of agents (or agencies) to recipients by the state and the international community as a whole through a process of institutionalization. Notably, Article 22 underscores that: 'Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization, *through national effort and international co-operation and in accordance with the organization and resources of each State*, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality.'3 Under human rights law, then, the state and the international community have the responsibility of providing for the individual who lacks the resources to provide for him- or herself. But what happens when states fall short of their pledges or become disorganized? What are we to do in a society that prefers to ignore its poor and least advantaged, and values lower taxes over a commitment to welfare?

In Levinas' ethics, obligations to help the needy, in particular an obligation ´ to feed the hungry, are not merely institutionalized welfare obligations awaiting allocation by the state to agents or agencies. While it is doubtlessly the case that in modern societies the obligation to help the needy is often best fulfilled at the institutional level in the form of the welfare state, Levinas is clear that ´ *the fundamental obligation to help the needy is neither chosen nor allocated*: 'Prior to any act, I am concerned with the Other, and I can never be absolved from this responsibility' (Levinas ´ 1989: 290). This pre-contractarian and preconstitutional obligation, is according to Levinas ineluctable and inalienable ´ and, most importantly of all, *rests with me in particular*. To use an idiom from Dostoyevsky's *The Brothers Karamazov* that Levinas never tires of quoting: ´ 'every one of us is responsible for everyone else in every way, and I most of all' (Dostoyevsky 1984: 339; quoted by Levinas ´ 1981: 146 *passim*).

To be sure, this 'most of all' makes little sense from the point of view of logic according to which guilt and responsibility are of a fixed amount that is divided among individuals. If we all have responsibility for each other, then is it not the case that we have it *equally*? But, if someone reneges on his or her responsibility to the needy, Levinas suggests, I now find myself with more responsibility than ´

2 UDHR, Preamble, para. 6. 3 UDHR, Art. 22. I had before, namely, my original responsibility *plus* the responsibility of the one who reneged (cf. also Singer 2000). What this suggests is that responsibility multiplies rather than divides, leading to the apparently illogical result that I can be *fully* responsible, say, for the death of someone notwithstanding that others in the same circumstances who did not do their 'fair share' can also be held at least *partially* responsible. Of course, it is frequently pointed out that, while we have a duty to help save the starving, no one of us could possibly save all the starving people in the world. There are simply too many indigent and needy, and none of us has the resources. Therefore, *I personally* cannot be under an obligation to help all those who have a right to be fed. But Levinas' ethics ´ does not traffic in abstract duties and generalities. There is no *perfect* obligation to meet a universal demand for help for those whose agency is under threat. Speaking in *Totality and Infinity* of the power of the Other's face to summons me to respond with 'an infinite responsibility', Levinas asserts: 'The infinity of ´ responsibility denotes not its actual immensity, but a responsibility increasing in the measure that it is assumed; duties become greater in the measure that they are accomplished. The better I accomplish my duty the fewer rights I have; the more I am just the more guilty I am' (Levinas ´ 1969: 244).

The 'infinity' of responsibility is not mathematical but refers to the impossibility of discharging completely a duty to save *this* person whom I could help but didn't. It should be mentioned, if only in passing, that, in living the normal affluent way of life we have come to expect in the West, we can never be certain that we have not unthinkingly, without realizing it, deprived someone of some means to life. For example, when we purchase goods made of cash crops imported from people in the developing world, do we not fail to discharge our responsibilities to the very people we ought to be helping? Levinas puts it even ´ more strongly: 'When we sit down at the table in the morning and drink coffee, we kill an Ethiopian who doesn't have any coffee' (Levinas ´ 1988: 173).

#### **Self-worth and moral dignity**

But why is it the case that the 'better I accomplish my duty the fewer rights I have'? Do I not have equal dignity and a face too? And do I not therefore have the same rights as other members of the human family? Perhaps the most radical aspect of Levinas' ethics, the part that is most difficult to swallow by ´ those who attempt to ground the notion of dignity and rights in reason alone, is the priority that Levinas cedes to the rights of the Other over my rights. It is ´ essentially this point made in *Totality and Infinity* where Levinas writes: 'What I ´ permit myself to demand of myself is not comparable with what I have the right to demand of the Other' (Levinas ´ 1969:53). Freedom here ('what I permit myself to demand of myself') is the freedom that is required to exercise an obligation, not the freedom to claim a right for myself. Unlike the traditional view on the rights of man, in which my rights are seen as competing with those of my neighbour, whereby my right to freedom can always be exercised at the expense of the rights of the other (say, the right to life), Lev´ inas underscores the sense in which the rights of the other have priority over my own. This indeed is how they appear *phenomenologically*: 'In their original *mise-en-sc`ene*there is also the affirmation, as a manifestation of freedom, of the rights of the obligated person, not only as the result of the simple transference and . . . generalization of the rights of man as they appear in others to the obligated person' (Levinas ´ 1994: 125). For Levinas, rights ´ *appear* in the first instance as the rights of the other. My own dignity and (positive) freedom, understood as the capacity to transcend my natural impulses is necessarily hidden from me as long as it is exercised solely in the service of spontaneity and enjoyment. As Levinas states: 'My consciousness ´ of my ego reveals no right to me. My freedom shows itself to be arbitrary' (Levinas ´ 1990: 17). It is only when I am confronted with Others' needs that the *non-arbitrary* exercise of freedom is made manifest to me, in whose name my own call for recognition and respect, which derive from my responsibility to the Other as an investing of one's own freedom, becomes justified for the first time. Levinas is perhaps the only philosopher who has sufficiently appreciated ´ how much my dignity is bound up with the defense of the rights of others, in the form of responsibility for the Other, which 'is not something constructed by philosophy; it is the unreal reality of men persecuted in the daily history of the world, whose dignity and meaning metaphysics has never recognized, from which philosophers turn their faces' (Levinas ´ 1987: 150).

#### **References**

- Angle, S. C., and Svensson, M. 2001. *The Chinese Human Rights Reader: Documents and Commentary*, 1900–2000. New York: East Gate Book
- Dostoyevsky, F. 1984. *The Brothers Karamazov*, trans. D. Magarshack. London: Penguin Husserl, E. 1991. *Cartesian Meditations*, trans. D. Cairns. Dordrecht: Kluwer
- Kant, I. 1983. *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, trans. H. J. Paton. London: Hutchinson
- Levinas, E. ´ 1969. *Totality and Infinity*, trans. A. Lingis. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press
	- 1981. *Otherwise Than Being or Beyond Essence*, trans. A. Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
	- 1987. 'No Identity', in *Collected Philosophical Papers*, trans. A. Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
	- 1988. 'The Paradox of Morality Interview',*The Provocation of L´evinas*, ed. R. Bernasconi and D. Wood. London: Routledge
	- 1989. 'Ethics and Politics', in *The L´evinas Reader*, trans. S. Hand. Oxford: Blackwell
	- 1990. 'A Religion for Adults', in *Difficult Freedom*, trans. S. Hand. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press
	- 1994. 'The Rights of Man and the Rights of the Other', in *Outside the Subject*, trans. M. B. Smith. Stanford University Press
	- 1998a. 'Notes on Meaning', in *Of God Who Comes to Mind*, trans. B. Bergo. Stanford University Press
- 1998b. 'Secularization and Hunger', trans. B. Bergo, *Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal* 20(2)–21(1): 3–12
- 1998c. 'The Permanent and the Human in Husserl', in *Discovering Existence with Husserl*, trans. and ed. R. A. Cohen and M. B. Smith. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press
- 1999a. 'The Prohibition Against Representation and "The Rights of Man"', in *Alterity and Transcendence*, trans. M. B. Smith. London: Athlone Press
- 1999b. 'The Rights of the Other Man', in *Alterity and Transcendence*, trans. M. B. Smith. London: Athlone Press
- Lindholm, T. 1999. 'Article 1', in *The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Common Standard of Achievement*, ed. G. Alfredsson and A. Eide. The Hague, Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers

Singer, P. 2000. *Writings on an Ethical Life*. New York: The Echo Press