### Human dignity in Renaissance humanism 

PIET STEENBAKKERS

#### **Renaissance humanism**

As a topic worthy of sustained and systematic scrutiny, human dignity first appeared on the philosophical agenda in the Renaissance. An indication of this is the appearance, from the middle of the fifteenth century onwards, of several tracts about the dignity and excellence of man. Yet, in spite of this apparently straightforward state of affairs, the Renaissance treatment of human dignity has also given rise to confusion. The reason for this is that we tend to read our own conceptions of human dignity into Renaissance discussions of it. Moreover, the new interest in human dignity in the fifteenth century is related to the revival of classical culture known as 'Renaissance humanism'. The tendency to conflate this movement with later systems that have been labelled 'humanism', too, has been pervasive since the middle of the nineteenth century. In order to clear the ground, I must first disentangle the different meanings of the elastic notion of humanism.

The word 'Humanismus' was coined in 1808 by the German theologian and pedagogue, Friedrich Niethammer, to denote the educational current that laid much store by the study of the classical languages and literature (Niethammer 1808). In the course of the nineteenth century, however, the word came to be applied to a variety of currents, positions and worldviews. Particularly influential was Georg Voigt's use of the term to label the Renaissance programme of restoring ancient learning (Voigt 1859). Though the Renaissance scholars and thinkers who brought this movement about did not call themselves 'humanists',1 the label caught on. Since that time, 'Renaissance humanism' refers to the educational and cultural project to re-establish the liberal arts or*studia humanitatis* of antiquity,2 the pursuit of which was considered to be the privilege of free

<sup>1</sup> The word '(h)umanista' did exist, but it had a very limited application: in Italian university terminology, the *umanista* was the teacher of the liberal arts, as the *jurista* was the professor of law. For the links between *umanista* and *humanism*, see Kristeller 1979: Chapter 1. On the occurrence and use of 'humanist' in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, see Ramminger 2007.

<sup>2</sup> In the fifteenth century, these arts comprised grammar, rhetoric, history, poetry and moral philosophy (Kristeller 1979: 22). They constitute the 'middle ground between

persons (as distinct from slaves). But, apart from this well-defined acceptation, 'humanism' acquired a wide range of other (sometimes conflicting) meanings.3 Here is a suitably loose description that attempts to cover some of their common features: 'Humanism is also [i.e. in addition to being the designation for the cultural movement of the Renaissance] any philosophy which recognizes the value or dignity of man and makes him the measure of all things or somehow takes human nature, its limits, or its interests as its theme.' Since such features have also been perceived in the culture of the Renaissance,4 the different meanings have blurred. Even though scholars will insist on the historical specificity of Renaissance humanism,5 there is an indelible popular image of the Renaissance. In this view, humanism carries the connotation of a turn towards humanity, implying that the Renaissance drew away from the divine and eternal which formed the focus of the medieval world picture, and began to discover the human and secular instead. Thus, the Renaissance is conceived as the first stage of a progress towards modernity, a process characterized by secularization and the rise of a humanist worldview. It is this confusion that makes it difficult for us to gauge what Renaissance authors are up to when they sing the praises of man's dignity and excellence.

This is not to say that it is mistaken to regard the Renaissance as an early stage of the process that shaped the modern world as we know it. I do, however, reject the tacit assumptions underlying the popular image. The most important of these is that Renaissance humanism is somehow continued by present-day humanism, which is characterized by a secular, liberal and individualist outlook. An implication of this is that the Renaissance veered away from religion. As we shall see in this chapter, these assumptions are erroneous. I will briefly return to this in the conclusion to this chapter.

#### **Excellence, superiority and dignity**

In employing 'dignity', 'excellence' and 'superiority' as equivalent terms, Renaissance authors take their cue from Cicero's *De officiis*:

purely practical studies such as law, medicine, or the mechanical arts on the one hand, and purely theoretical studies such as natural philosophy, advanced logical theory, metaphysics, and theology on the other' (Hankins 2007: 32).

- 3 For the historical development, see Menze 1974; for an attempt to classify its usage in later philosophy, see, for example, Luik 1998.
- 4 Here, Jacob Burckhardt's classic study, *Die Cultur der Renaissance in Italien* (1860), was a major influence. Among the defining characteristics of the period, Burckhardt stresses the development of the individual ('*Zweiter Abschnitt: Entwicklung des Individuums*') and the discovery of the world and of man ('*Vierter Abschnitt: Die Entdeckung der Welt und des Menschen*').
- 5 See, for example, Trinkaus 1983: 3–31; and Hankins 2007; for further suggestions see the helpful bibliographical references in Copenhaver and Schmitt 1992: 24, n. 20.

But it is essential to every inquiry about duty that we keep before our eyes how far superior man is by nature to cattle and other beasts: they have no thought except for sensual pleasure and this they are impelled by every instinct to seek; but man's mind is nurtured by study and meditation; he is always either investigating or doing, and he is captivated by the pleasure of seeing and hearing . . . From this we see that sensual pleasure is quite unworthy of the dignity [*praestantia*] of man and that we ought to despise it and cast it from us; but if someone should be found who sets some value upon sensual gratification, he must keep strictly within the limits of moderate indulgence. One's physical comforts and wants, therefore, should be ordered according to the demands of health and strength, not according to the calls of pleasure. And if we will only bear in mind the superiority and dignity [*excellentia et dignitas*] of our nature, we shall realize how wrong it is to abandon ourselves to excess and to live in luxury and voluptuousness, and how right it is to live in thrift, self-denial, simplicity, and sobriety. (Cicero 1913: I.30: 105–6)

Cicero identifies *excellentia* and *praestantia* ('pre-eminence, superiority') and links these notions to *dignitas*: 'to us Nature herself has assigned a character of surpassing excellence, far superior to that of all other living creatures [*magna cum excellentia praestantiaque animantium reliquarum*]' (*ibid*.: 97: I.28). This idea of human dignity, which is Stoic in origin,6 was the guiding inspiration for humanist authors from Petrarch onwards: it is a summons to rise above animal existence by using the distinctively human gift of reason. The Renaissance view of human dignity was the result of an absorption of classical sources, in an attempt to understand the human condition as more complex and less wretched than it had commonly been pictured in the Christian tradition the humanist authors inherited from and shared with their medieval predecessors.

At the end of the eleventh century, Lothar of Segni, who was to become Pope Innocent III, wrote an immensely popular tract on the misery of the human condition. His intention was to complement this with another text on the dignity of human nature, but that was never realized. Around 1357, a friend of Francesco Petrarca, Giovanni Birel Limosino (Prior General of the Carthusians) implored him to supply this missing treatise, but Petrarch politely declined. Instead, he inserted a dialogue on 'Sadness and Misery' in his *De remediis utriusque fortunae* ('Remedies for Both Faces of Fortune'), in which he set forth his thoughts on the issue (Petrarch 1869–70: 513–22).7 There Petrarch – or rather his spokesperson, Reason personified – observed that authors find it a good deal easier to write about human misery than about happiness (Petrarch 1975: 220: I.93). Fortune has two faces, but moral philosophy tends to over-emphasize the negative side: original sin and the ensuing human wretchedness. Petrarch and Renaissance thinkers generally regretted the one-sidedness of this picture, which did not do justice to real life, nor to the biblical view of man as made in God's image

6 More particularly Cleanthes and Chrysippus (Horstmann 1980: 1124).

<sup>7</sup> See also R. Schottlaender's note to his edition of Petrarch's *De remediis*: Petrarch 1975: 220.

(Genesis 1:26) and as ruler of the Earth (Genesis 1:28) (Trinkaus 1983: 136–7; Kraye 1988: 306–11). Apart from extolling human dignity as the distinguishing feature of human nature, Cicero had also given a narrower interpretation, namely, that of political dignity or notability. Petrarch had elaborated that theme (as well as that of moral dignity) in his *De viris illustribus*. In the dialogue on sadness and misery, he acknowledges that the miserable aspects of the human condition are indeed huge and manifold. That should not, however, make us blind to the many things that make life happy and agreeable, though that is something nobody has ever written about (or so Petrarch alleges). And yet, the likeness of the Creator's image is inscribed in the human soul; we have talents, eloquence, memory and foresight; inventions and discoveries, arts and sciences. Petrarch then enumerates the beautiful things in the world that give us joy, and mentions the admirable features of the human body. Moreover, man's dignity even surpasses that of the angels: for God became a man, not another creature. Petrarch's moderate optimism evinces the energetic and inquisitive attitude of the beginnings of Renaissance humanism. It blends with a profoundly Christian outlook on the ambiguity of the human condition, with God's likeness and the Incarnation of Christ as the ultimate foundations of the excellence and dignity of man.

Bartolomeo Facio (or Faccio) opens his short treatise 'On the Excellence and Preeminence of Man' of 1448 with an explicit reference to Innocent III: it aims at supplying the complementary volume that Innocent III never wrote.8 This was not a spontaneous idea: the work was commissioned by Alfonso of Aragon, King of Naples. Facio connects the Christian idea of man's central position in creation with the partly classical and partly theological celebration of a contemplative life. Man was made in God's image, and it is human reason and in particular the immortality of the mind that confers something of a divine nature to man. Accordingly, the greatest part of Facio's argument is taken up by a discussion of the immortality of the soul and of a future life, based on religious and philosophical authorities. Human happiness consists in contemplating God: Facio's treatise shows no interest in the active life.

Apparently, Alfonso was not yet satisfied with this rather perfunctory interpretation, for he then asked Giannozzo Manetti for a work on the same topic.9 Manetti wrote his *De dignitate et excellentia hominis* around 1450. 10 It differs

- 8 *De excellentia ac praestantia hominis liber* was written in 1447–8, but first published in 1611 as an appendix to Marquard Freher's edition of Felino Sandeo's *De regibus Siciliae et Apuleia*. The reference to Innocent III is on p. 149 of that edition.
- 9 Both Facio and Manetti had been asked to write on human dignity not only by Alfonso, but also by the Benedictine monk Antonius Bargensis (Antonio da Barga), who had sent them a manuscript of his own on this very subject. Barga's treatment was preponderantly theological, and Facio appears to have followed his example fairly closely. See Kristeller 1965: 68; Trinkaus 1973: 143.
- 10 For the genesis of the text, see A. Buck, 'Einleitung', and Manetti's dedication to Alfonso, in Manetti 1990.

considerably from Facio's treatise in size and scope. He insists on the active life as one of the features that define human dignity and excellence. It is precisely the combination of acting and understanding that makes human beings superior. Manetti develops his argument systematically, and in a continuous dialogue with authors who had dwelt upon human misery (among them Innocent III): Book I deals with the excellent properties of the human body, Book II with those of the soul; Book III elaborates the creative power that the combination of body and soul is capable of. The world of civilization, the arts and sciences was created by human beings, out of the raw material of the natural world in which they found themselves. The fourth book then concludes with a detailed repudiation of the arguments for human wretchedness.

The core of Manetti's argument is the exposition of human superiority in the third book. It is founded on the idea that God created and arranged the world for the sake of human beings alone (Manetti 1990: 68: Book III, para. 5). He created them last of all, in his own likeness, endowed with senses and intellect (*ibid*.: 69: para. 7).11 Men's talents (*ingenium*) enabled them to create buildings, cities, pictures, sculptures, arts, sciences, wisdom and infinitely many other achievements (*ibid*.: 77: para. 20). Our wisdom is ultimately rooted in knowledge and worship of God (*ibid*.: 78–9: paras. 21–2). The sage, who (unlike animals) is capable of controlling anger and desire, is presented as the highest form of human existence (*ibid*.: 79–80: para. 24). Men are exceedingly rich and powerful, the lords of all creation, and they may use all creatures for their own benefit (*ibid*.: 80–1, 83: paras. 25–7, 30). Manetti endorses his argument with many references to the Bible and to classical authors. Quoting with approval Cicero (who in turn refers to Aristotle), he describes man as a mortal god, born for two things: understanding and acting (*ibid*.: 91: para. 47).12 When God created man, he wanted him to strive for faith and wisdom (*ibid*.: 91–2, 95: paras. 48, 55). The third book concludes with a short paragraph in which the Incarnation is offered as the final proof of human superiority (*ibid*.: 97, para. 59).

#### **Giovanni Pico della Mirandola**

In spite of the wide variety of sources Manetti adduces, the general drift of his argument is still basically the early humanist mixture of Stoic and Christian positions that is already to be found in Petrarch. In the final decade of the fifteenth century, a crucial development in Renaissance philosophy will lead to new perspectives on human dignity. Owing to the work of Marsilio Ficino, an abundance of Platonic sources rapidly becomes available in Latin: Plato's works,

- 11 Cf. *De excellentia ac praestantia hominis liber* (note 8 above), p. 117, para. 45, which runs thus in the Latin text: 'tum fecit [Deus] ipse sibi simulacrum sensibile atque intelligens, hoc est ad imaginis suijpsius formam, qua nihil poterat esse perfectius.'
- 12 See also Cicero, *De finibus* II, 13, 40, referring to Aristotle, *Eth. Nic*. I 6, 1097b28–33.

Plotinus and the so-called *Corpus hermeticum*. 13 In addition, Ficino produced a series of highly influential commentaries, and developed a Platonic philosophy (or theology, as he himself styled it) of his own (cf. Copenhaver and Schmitt 1992: Chapter 3; Celenza 2007). His revival of Platonism profoundly influenced the course of Western philosophy in the centuries to come. One immediate effect was a revision of the relationship between action and contemplation:

Ficino presented the contemplative life as the final step in a hierarchy of human action that led people to surpass the active life without utterly denying it: lived well, the active life becomes a step on the way to escaping matter and uniting with God. (Copenhaver and Schmitt 1992: 144)

As Ficino argues in his *Theologia Platonica*, what this union with God comes down to is that we become godlike when our intellect understands God through contemplation (Kraye 1988:349). The impact of this hefty treatise 'on the immortality of the soul', written in 1474, was greatly reinforced by a revolutionary new invention: it appeared in print in 1482.

Giovanni Pico della Mirandola was a pupil and friend of Ficino, and he incorporated the latter's brand of Platonism into his own original, albeit eclectic, system. Although he was only thirty-one years old when he died in 1494, he left a considerable *œuvre*. His fame, however, rests on a single short work, published posthumously: an oration that he never delivered, and that received its title 'Oration on the Dignity of Man' only in an edition of 1557. 14 In 1486, Pico drew up 900 theses (*Conclusiones*) about all things knowable, on which he wanted to organize a huge public dispute in Rome.15 The (untitled) *Oration* was written as an inaugural address to open this debate. Pope Innocent VIII condemned the project and prevented the dispute. Only the first part of the *Oration* deals with the topic of human dignity; the rest discusses Pico's selection of theses and authorities. On principle, Pico refuses to limit himself to particular schools or currents:

I have wished to bring into view the things taught not merely according to one doctrine (as some would desire), but things taught according to every sort of doctrine, that by this comparison of very many sects and by the discussion of manifold philosophy, that radiance of truth which Plato mentions in his *Letters* might shine more clearly upon our minds, like the sun rising from the deep. (Pico della Mirandola 1998: 23)

Pico begins by expressing his dissatisfaction with the arguments traditionally adduced for the superiority (*praestantia*) of human nature and asserting that

- 14 Buck, 'Einleitung', XVII, in Pico della Mirandola 1990.
- 15 Farmer 1998; on the turbulent events surrounding the dispute that eventually did not take place: *Ibid*.: 1–18.

<sup>13</sup> On the *Corpus Hermeticum*, allegedly a collection of very ancient writings but in 1614 shown by Isaac Casaubon to be an early Christian fabrication from the first or second century CE, see (for example) Walker 1972; Yates 1964.

he has finally discovered why man is the happiest living being, 'what the state is that is allotted to man in the succession of things, and that is capable of arousing envy not only in the brutes but also in the stars and even in the minds beyond the world' (*ibid*.: 3). When God had created the rest of the world, he wanted there to be someone who would understand and appreciate it and love its beauty, and so he created man. But all properties had already been dispensed, and all seats were occupied. God then decided

that that to which nothing of its very own could be given should be, in composite fashion, whatsoever had belonged individually to each and every thing. Therefore He took up man, a work of indeterminate form; and, placing him at the midpoint of the world, He spoke to him as follows: ' . . . In conformity with thy free judgment, in whose hands I have placed thee, thou art confined by no bounds; and thou wilt fix limits of nature for thyself. I have placed thee at the center of the world . . . Neither heavenly nor earthly, neither mortal nor immortal have We made thee . . . Thou canst grow downward into the lower natures which are brutes. Thou canst again grow upward from thy soul's reason into the higher natures which are divine.' (Pico della Mirandola 1998: 4–5)

Taking up the traditional Aristotelian and scholastic division of functions of the soul into nutrition, sensation and cognition, Pico asserts that each person's development will depend on the aspect they cultivate: those who cultivate the nutritive and reproductive part will become plants, those who cultivate the senses will be brutes, but if reason and understanding are pursued, they will be angels, sons of God (*ibid*.: 5). Nor does it stop there: he who retreats into the centre of his own unity is 'made one spirit with God' (*ibid*.):

If you come upon a pure contemplator, ignorant of the body, banished to the innermost places of the mind, he is not an earthly, not a heavenly animal; he more superbly is a divinity clothed with human flesh. (Pico della Mirandola 1998: 6)

Here we see Ficino's Platonic programme of uniting with God through contemplation integrated into a dynamic conception of human superiority as an unlimited capacity for growth and development. Though Pico does not depart from the ascetic perspective inherited from the Stoic idea of human dignity, the focus is now on the creative power of man.

The originality of Pico's *Oration* is its bold preference for the power to choose between different routes of development as the distinctive feature of human dignity. There is no external pressure to opt for one rather than the other: 'thou art confined by no bounds'. Yet it would be a mistake to conclude that the choice is genuinely open: throughout the *Oration*, Pico vividly depicts the hierarchical organization of creation. Human beings may take the intellectual way to contemplation, or the animal or even vegetable way to physical satisfaction, but God's intention is clear. Those who develop the intellect will be rewarded by peace of mind, those who degenerate into a sensual or vegetative existence will be punished by transforming themselves into lower beings.

#### **Conclusion**

Renaissance humanism developed a sophisticated notion of human dignity. A survey of the three most important treatises on the topic, by Facio, Manetti and Pico, shows that – in spite of the many traditional influences they assimilated, pagan and Christian, philosophical and theological – their contributions have been original and innovative, too. The most important effect was probably the sustained attention for human assets, achievements and successes. If there is a link between the Renaissance philosophy of man and modernity, it will have to be situated here. Their positive approach to human potential responded to the needs of a dynamic society on the threshold of an era of incomparable development. Yet their ideas on human dignity did not evolve to presentday views, let alone in a linear fashion. For all Renaissance thinkers, human excellence, superiority and dignity are a gift from God, a result of the plan of his creation. They conceived of dignity as a feature shared by all human beings, but for them this did not imply that all were entitled to inalienable human rights – rights that can be claimed merely by dint of being human. In fact, they saw dignity as an assignment; those who failed to realize it thereby proved that they were unworthy of the honorary name of man:

if you see a man given over to his belly and crawling upon the ground, it is a bush not a man that you see. If you see anyone blinded by the illusions of his empty and Calypso-like imagination . . . delivered over to the senses, it is a brute not a man that you see. (Pico della Mirandola 1998: 6)

Thus, dignity will apply to some people but not to others, even to the point of excluding them from humanity – 'Wen solche Lehren nicht erfreun, verdienet nicht ein Mensch zu sein.'16 In this respect, Renaissance humanism has nothing in common with a humanist worldview as it is now generally understood.

#### **References**

- Burckhardt, J. 1860. *Die Cultur der Renaissance in Italien: Ein Versuch*. Basel: Schweighauser
- Celenza, C. 2007. 'The Revival of Platonic Philosophy', in J. Hankins (ed.), *The Cambridge Companion to Renaissance Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press, 72–96
- 16 Emanuel Schikaneder, libretto to Mozart's *Die Zauberfl¨ote* (1791, KV 620), Act 2, Scene 3, No. 15: Sarastro's aria 'In diesen heil'gen Hallen'. In English: 'Whoever is not delighted by these doctrines does not deserve to be a human being.'
- Cicero, M. Tullius. 1913. *De officiis*, with an English translation, ed. and trans. W. Miller. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, Loeb edition (retrieved 10 June 2013 from urn:cts:latinLit:phi0474.phi055.perseus-lat1 (Latin text) and urn:cts:latinLit:phi0474.phi055.perseus-eng1 (English translation))
- Copenhaver, B. P., and Schmitt, C. B. 1992. *Renaissance Philosophy*. Oxford University Press
- Facio, B. 1611. 'De excellentia ac praestantia hominis', in F. Sandeo, *De regibus Siciliae et Apuleiae*, ed. M. Freher. Hanau: Aubry's Heirs, 149–68
- Farmer, S. A. 1998. *Syncretism in the West: Pico's 900 Theses (1486): The Evolution of Traditional Religious and Philosophical Systems*, with Text, Translation and Commentary. Tempe, AZ: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies
- Hankins, J. 2007. 'Humanism, Scholasticism, and Renaissance Philosophy', in J. Hankins (ed.), *The Cambridge Companion to Renaissance Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press, 30–48
- Horstmann, R. P. 1980. 'Menschenwurde', in J. Ritter and K. Gr ¨ under (eds.), ¨ *Historisches W¨orterbuch der Philosophie*, vol. 5. Basel: Schwabe, 1124–7
- Kraye, J. 1988. 'Moral Philosophy', in C. B. Schmitt, Q. Skinner, E. Kessler and J. Kraye (eds.), *The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press, 301–86
- Kristeller, P. O. 1965. 'The Humanist Bartolomeo Facio and His Unknown Correspondence', in Ch. Carter (ed.), *From the Renaissance to the Counter-Reformation: Essays in Honor of Garrett Mattingly*. New York: Random House, 56–74
	- 1979. *Renaissance Thought and Its Sources*, ed. M. Mooney. New York: Columbia University Press
	- 1998. 'Humanism', in C. B. Schmitt, Q. Skinner, E. Kessler and J. Kraye (eds.), *The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy*. Cambridge University Press: 1113–17
- Luik, J. C. 1998. 'Humanism', in E. Craig (ed.), *Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. London: Routledge (online edition, www.rep.routledge.com/article/N025SECT4 (accessed 7 June 2013))
- Manetti, G. 1532. *De dignitate et excellentia hominis libri IV*. Basel: Andreas Cratander, http://dx.doi.org/10.3931/e-rara-1740
	- 1990. *Uber die W¨ ¨ urde und Erhabenheit des Menschen*, trans. H. Leppin, introd. A. Buck. Hamburg: Meiner
- Menze, C. 1974. 'Humanismus, Humanitat I', in J. Ritter (ed.), ¨ *Historisches W¨orterbuch der Philosophie*, vol. 3. Basel: Schwabe, 1217–20
- Niethammer, F. I.1808. *Der Streit des Philanthropinismus und Humanismus in der Theorie des Erziehungs-Unterrichts unsrer Zeit*. Jena: Frommann
- Petrarca, F. 1869–70. *Lettere senili*, trans. G. Fracassetti, 2 vols. Florence: Successori Le Monnier
	- 1975. *De remediis utriusque fortunae*, zweisprachige Ausgabe in Auswahl, trans. and ed. R. Schottlaender, bibliogr. E. Keßler. Munich: Fink
- Pico della Mirandola, G. 1990. *De hominis dignitate/Uber die W¨ ¨ urde des Menschen*, trans. N. Baumgarten, introd. A. Buck. Hamburg: Meiner
	- 1998. 'On the Dignity of Man', trans. C. Wallis (revised by P. Miller), in G. Pico della Mirandola, *On the Dignity of Man: On Being and the One: Heptaplus*, trans. C.

Wallis, P. Miller and D. Carmichael, introd. P. Miller. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1–34

- Ramminger, J. 2007. '"Nur ein Humanist . . . ": Einige neue Beispiele fur¨ *humanista* im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert', in M. Pade (ed.), *Album amicorum: Festskrift til Karsten Friis-Jensen i anledning af hans 60 ars fødselsdag/Studies in Honour of Karsten ˚ Friis-Jensen on the Occasion of his Sixtieth Birthday* (*Renæssanceforum,* vol.3), www. renaessanceforum.dk/rf 3 2007.htm (accessed 7 June 2013)
- Trinkaus, C. 1973. 'Renaissance Idea of the Dignity of Man', in P. Wiener (ed.), *Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas*, vol. 4. New York: Scribner, 136–47
	- 1983. *The Scope of Renaissance Humanism*. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press
- Voigt, G. 1859. *Die Wiederbelebung des classischen Alterthums oder das erste Jahrhundert des Humanismus*. Berlin: Reimer
- Walker, D. P. 1972. *The Ancient Theology: Studies in Christian Platonism from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century*. London: Duckworth
- Yates, F. A. 1964. *Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition*. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul