## Human dignity in South American law CLAUDIA LIMA MARQUES AND LUCAS LIXINSKI ∗

The aim of this chapter is to explore the ways in which human dignity has been used as a legal concept across South American countries. The concept has high value, and has been central to (at least Western) legal thinking since the approval of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) in 1948 (Canc¸ado Trindade 2008: 11). As all South American constitutions currently in force were established after the UDHR, we suggest that human dignity plays a central role in those constitutions as well, and thus in the legal orders of all countries on the South American continent.

In order to support this claim, this chapter will focus primarily on comparative constitutional law, but it will also look at selected examples of uses of the notion of dignity in other legal contexts. Our central contention is that the concept of human dignity has evolved as an axiological (as a core value or fundamental principle) and normative foundation (as a fundamental right or rule) of the legal systems of South American countries, and that, even though theoretically under-developed, the notion has been used extensively by lawyers and judges.1 This 'under-comprehension' of the concept, however, has led to the reduction of its normative value and even threatens to nullify it altogether, at least before the eyes of society at large (cf. Lorenzetti 1998: 166).

The chapter is structured in two sections: first, we will look at 'dignity clauses' in South American constitutions (that is: constitutional law and theory), and, second, examine the extra-constitutional role of the notion of human dignity.

#### **Dignity in South American constitutions**

The centrality of dignity in Kantian thought has readily seeped into South American constitutions, in no small part due to the German influence in the drafting of South American constitutions during transitions from authoritarian

- ∗ We are highly indebted to A. Michel, C. Perrone, P. Baquero, S. Schwager and V. Garbini for the research assistance in collecting the comparative case law. All errors remain the authors'.
- 1 See, for Mexico, Novoa Monreal 1997: 22; for Argentina, Mosset Iturraspe 1994: 10; and, for Brazil, De Moraes 2003: 113.

regimes to democracies (Sarlet 2004: 61).2 As such, human dignity became the very cornerstone of legal orders across the continent.

Curiously enough, South American law has developed its own version of how dignity should be used. Instead of looking at dignity as a baseline that, if impinged upon, automatically invalidates legislation, South American law looks at dignity as yet another fundamental right, but one that cannot be defined and thus in this quality is unfortunately used as a clause with the power to 'patch up' legal reasoning when a justification based on another norm cannot be articulated by the judge. In other words, human dignity has become more of a rhetorical tool in legal (particularly judicial)3 reasoning than a well-structured, carefully used legal mechanism. Case law on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights follows along the same lines, using references to dignity in the UDHR as an additional rhetorical device to stress a point, but attributing to the idea of dignity enshrined in the document a very indirect function.4

The UDHR's dignity clause has been used as an additional argument by a Brazilian court in stating that essential utility services, such as the provision of water, could not be suspended in case of non-payment, precisely because of their essential character for the realization of human rights and human dignity as protected by the Declaration.5 The UDHR and its construction of dignity have also been invoked as the basis for a 'principle of humanity' with regard to the treatment of persons deprived of liberty, particularly mental health patients.6 Another case involves the use of human dignity in the Universal Declaration as implying a general ethics of human rights protection so as to uphold the right of a transsexual to change names.7

Most South American constitutions8 (with the notable exceptions of Uruguay's 1997 Constitution, last amended in 2004, 9 and Argentina's 1994

- 4 For an analysis of this case law in Brazil, see Lima Marques and Lixinski 2009: 155–6.
- 5 State Court of Appeals of Rio de Janeiro, *Interlocutory Appeal (AI) 2001.002.11382*, judgment of 9 May 2002.
- 6 State Court of Appeals of Rio de Janeiro, *Criminal Appeal (ApCrim.) 1995.050.00066*, judgment of 27 June 1995.
- 7 State Court of Appeals of Rio Grande do Sul, *Civil Appeal (ApC´ıv.) 70013909874*, judgment of 5 April 2006.
- 8 French Guyana has been excluded, as it is still a French territory. The country therefore uses the same legal system as France, including the French notion of dignity.
- 9 But the Uruguayan Constitution does mention the protection of rights 'inherent to human personality' (Art. 72).

<sup>2</sup> One must also take into consideration the Mexican Constitution of 1917, written before the German Weimar Constitution of 1919.

<sup>3</sup> Dignity has been used especially in connection with family law, rights of the accused and of persons deprived of liberty, *habeas corpus*, among others. The case law is, however, largely a repetition of the (non-)articulation of human dignity in constitutional texts, and examples in this chapter will be sparse, mostly due to space constraints.

Constitution) recognize human dignity and its importance. The uses of dignity in constitutional texts can be of three different types.

First, there are countries which attribute moral value to dignity, but fall short of turning it into a positive legal rule. One example of this is the 1980 (with reforms in 1996) Constitution of Guyana, which mentions the protection of human dignity, in its Preamble, as a historical legacy and as a pledge for the future. It does not, however, mention dignity in the actual constitutional text. Because 'dignity' is found in the Preamble, it is clearly a moral commitment of the nation and influences the way the actual Constitution is applied, but, because it is not in the text, it falls short of being a legal – not to mention enforceable – rule.

The second category is comprised of the vast majority of countries which place dignity at the very centre of the positive legal order. For instance, the 1988 Brazilian Constitution does include human dignity not in the list of fundamental rights, but as one of the very pillars of the republic (Article 1.III). Apart from this, there are no references to human dignity or dignity in the list of fundamental rights, and the only references are found in the articles of the Constitution that refer to the protection of children (Article 227), elderly persons (Article 230) and families (Article 226).

A similar situation occurs in the Paraguayan Constitution (1992), which recognizes human dignity as a foundation of the state (Article 1). Subsequently, dignity is mentioned in connection with the rights to honour, privacy and family life (Articles 23 and 33), the right to equality (Article 46) and the right to health (Article 68). Regarding the right to health, 'dignity' is mentioned in relation to sanitary law, operating as a limitation to the state's power to enact and enforce legislation in the area. The same idea of dignity as a gatekeeper lies behind the reference in the article that refers to compulsory military service: military service is compulsory unless it impinges upon a person's dignity (Article 129).

Venezuela's 1999 Constitution also mentions human dignity as a foundational value of the state (Article 3). Other provisions associate dignity with the protection of personal liberty (Article 46), protection of the elderly (Article 80), disabled persons (Article 81) and the right to fair wages (Article 91). Dignity has a gatekeeper function in the right to privacy by serving as a limit to judicial orders determining search and seizure (Article 47). It plays the same role in determining the extent to which force may be used by the police (Articles 55 and 332).

In Colombia's 1991 Constitution, dignity performs the function of a foundational norm of the state as well (Article 1). 'Dignity' is mentioned in connection with the protection of honour (Article 42), the protection of labour contracts and relations (Article 53) and the several distinctive cultures that compose the Colombian nation (Article 70). This reference to dignity in the context of culture is a prelude to a trend that is much more tangible in later constitutions, such as that of Bolivia.

The Bolivian 2009 Constitution also attributes to human dignity the condition of a foundational norm of the state and the legal order (Article 8.II). It also acknowledges dignity as an important component of several fundamental rights, including the right to honour and privacy (Article 21) and as a corollary to liberty (Articles 22, 23 and 73). But in this constitutional text dignity gains a new dimension, already hinted at in the Colombian Constitution: while hardly ever explicitly stated, there is the presumption that dignity is something that relates to the individual, as it is also conceptualized in the UDHR. However, the Bolivian Constitution speaks of the dignity of persons, nations, peoples and communities (Article 9.2), adding an important collective dimension to human dignity. This reflects a shift we find in recent Latin American constitutionalism from the liberal focus on the protection of individual rights to a more collectivist emphasis on the recognition of group rights and multiculturalism (particularly indigenous peoples, but also other traditional groups and communities).

In the latter case, 'dignity' appears as a term which signifies all fundamental rights protected by the constitution, since, if the legal order is founded on dignity, all norms must be interpreted as taking dignity into account. There is no right to dignity, but dignity is instead the source and ultimate purpose of all rights (cf. Rolla 2002: 471–2).

The third group is comprised of countries that do not recognize human dignity as an autonomous norm, but rather as an accessory rule to the protection of fundamental rights. One such example is Suriname's 1987 Constitution (with 1992 reforms), which mentions dignity only in the context of an article protecting personal liberty and safety, determining that people deprived of their liberty shall be treated with dignity (Article 16.3). And the Chilean Constitution of 1980 only speaks of dignity in the context of the protection of equality (Article 1), although it makes this reference in the title of the Constitution referring to the foundations of the country, and uses a language very similar to that of Article 1 of the UDHR.

Instances like these suggest that the reference to dignity is but a safeguard to guarantee the evolutionary interpretation (that is, interpretation that takes into account present-day values and circumstances – in opposition to finding an 'original meaning' to a provision) of the clause (cf. Garc´ıa Ram´ırez 2008: 355). That is to say, whenever dignity is mentioned in connection with another right, it has been suggested that this means dignity plays a role of leaving the door open for evolutionary interpretations that can respond to changes in the social and legal fabrics, while still maintaining the effectiveness of the constitutional text's commitment to the protection of fundamental rights (Garc´ıa Ram´ırez 2008: 468–9).

Naturally, these categories are not watertight, as most countries which attribute to dignity the value of a foundational norm also associate it with specific fundamental rights. One similarity between the second and third categories, however, is that dignity is not a right on its own. In other words, these constitutional texts do not formulate dignity as a *right*; dignity is either a foundational norm of the state, or a value to be taken into account when considering specific fundamental rights. In this sense, South American constitutions seem to have moved away from German constitutional law's explicit use of dignity as a right.

But obviously dignity does not play a role only in constitutional law: in law outside the constitutional realm one also finds many references to dignity. The following section will look at some of these uses.

#### **Dignity in extra-constitutional law**

The first type of use of dignity that is worth analyzing in this section is the protection of human dignity in the Inter-American System for the protection of human rights. Even though this is an international system, its influence on South American countries is undeniable (for example Garcia-Sayan´ 2005): the status of the American Convention on Human Rights in national legal orders is not uniform across the continent: some countries (Argentina and Brazil most notably) grant it the status of a constitutional norm, whereas others still look at the American Convention as being on a lower legal level than the domestic constitution. In other words, for some countries the American Convention will have the same weight as their domestic constitutions; for others, it will have the weight of ordinary legislation, and cannot modify the constitution. Regardless of the status in municipal legal orders, the fact remains that the American Convention and other instruments of the system have been important in shaping law across the continent, and make reference to human dignity.

For instance, the American Declaration on the Rights and Duties of Man (1948), which in fact preceded the UDHR, already mentions the protection of dignity in its Preamble, and then again in connection with property and private life (Article XXIII). The American Convention (1969, also known as the Pact of San Jose) mentions 'dignity' in connection with personal integrity (Article ´ 5), the prohibition of slavery (Article 6) and private life and reputation (Article 11). To be more specific, Article 11 articulates a right to dignity, but as a synonym for the protection of honour and reputation. This has been articulated by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in one of its cases, but there is very little case law concerning the protection of dignity as such.10

Regarding other instruments in the system, the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture also mentions 'dignity' in its Preamble, as does the San Salvador Protocol on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Inter-American Convention on Enforced Disappearances and the Inter-American Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities. The Inter-American Convention Against Violence Against Women (Belem do Par ´ a Convention) men- ´ tions that all women have a right to dignity (Article 4.e), in connection with the

10 Inter-American Court of Human Rights, *Ricardo Canese* v. *Paraguay*. Merits, Reparations and Costs. Judgment of 31 August 2004, Series C No. 111, para. 101. protection of families. The uses of dignity in the Inter-American instruments thus reflect to a large extent the uses in constitutional law: it does not articulate dignity as a right, but uses it as a moral imperative which permeates all human rights protection.

It is interesting to note that, in the Inter-American system of human rights protection, dignity generally loses its central dimension, gaining almost a 'ceremonial' role. It is nevertheless still important, much in the way dignity is important when mentioned in the Preambles to constitutions. This is so at least to the extent that references to dignity reassert or 'narrate' the values from whose perspective the entire instrument is to be interpreted.11

Besides international human rights law, human dignity is also a relevant concept in both criminal and civil law, particularly when it comes to the protection of honour and reputation, privacy, and even freedom of expression.12 Human dignity also plays a very important role in the affirmation of the legal category of 'personality rights' in private law,13 and in the protection of consumers' rights across the continent. Consumer law in South America has evolved in response to the need to protect the dignity of human beings as market agents, as opposed to more traditional understandings of dignity, which usually focus on dignity within the private realm of honour and family protection.14

But the fact of the matter remains that in none of these instances does there exist an autonomous right to dignity; instead, dignity is used as a means to reinforce rules, having more of an axiological-inspirational than normative value. It is nevertheless a role which cannot be disregarded, and perhaps ultimately the role that dignity, as a very open-ended and practically indefinable term, can play.

#### **Concluding remarks: the pervasiveness of an 'underdeveloped' concept**

Human dignity has evolved into a central norm of South American law. But it has done so not through the articulation of a 'right to dignity'; instead, dignity pervades the entirety of South American countries' legal orders by acting as an inspirational norm, either by being mentioned as one of the foundations of the state in several constitutions, or simply through other references, constitutional or not.

Perhaps this is precisely the strength of human dignity. To the extent that dignity is not a fully enforceable right, it cannot be combated; at the same time, because it is mentioned in all places, it cannot be ignored. The subtle power of human dignity in South American law is thus great, and praiseworthy.

- 11 On narration as a phenomenon of post-modern law, see Jayme 1995.
- 12 For a collection of examples of such uses, see Rolla 2002: 478–85.
- 13 On the Brazilian case regarding personality rights, see Lixinski 2006.
- 14 On the protection of consumer dignity, see Lima Marques (forthcoming).

#### **References**

- Canc¸ado Trindade, A. A. 2008. *Evolution du droit international au droit des gens*. Paris: Pedone
- De Moraes, C. B. 2003. 'O conceito de dignidade humana', in I. W. Sarlet (ed.), *Constitui¸c˜ao, Direitos Fundamentais e Direito Privado*. Porto Alegre: Livraria do Advogado
- Garc´ıa Ram´ırez, S. 2008. 'Recepcion de la Jurisprudencia Interamericana sobre Derechos ´ Humanos en el Derecho Interno', *Anuario de Derecho Constitucional Latinoamericano* 353–76
- Garc´ıa-Sayan, D. ´ 2005. 'Una Viva Interaccion: Corte Interamericana y Tribunales Inter- ´ nos', in *La Corte Interamericana de Derechos Humanos: Un Cuarto de Siglo*, ed. Inter-American Court of Human Rights, 323–84
- Jayme, E. 1995. 'Identite culturelle et int ´ egration: le droit international priv ´ e´ postmoderne – Cours general de droit international prive', ´ *Collected Courses of the Hague Academy of International Law* 251: 11
- Lima Marques, C. Forthcoming. 'Protection of the Weaker Party in Private International Law (Consumers, Small Business and Non-Profit-Making Activities)', *Recueil des Cours*
- Lima Marques, C., and Lixinski, L. 2009. 'Treaty Enforcement by Brazilian Courts: Reconciling Ambivalences and Myths?', *Brazilian Yearbook of International Law* 4(1): 138–69
- Lixinski, L. 2006. 'Considerac¸oes acerca da inserc ˜ ¸ao dos direitos de personalidade no ˜ ordenamento jur´ıdico brasileiro', *Revista de Direito Privado* 201
- Lorenzetti, R. 1998. *Fundamentos do Direito Privado*. Sao Paulo: Revista dos Tribunais ˜
- Mosset Iturraspe, J. 1994. *Visi´on Jurisprudencial del Valor de la Vida Humana*. Buenos Aires: Rubinzal Culzoni
- Novoa Monreal, E. 1997. *Derecho a la Vida Privada y Libertad de Informaci´on*. Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI
- Rolla, G. 2002. 'El Valor Normativo del Principio de la Dignidad Humana: Consideraciones en Torno a las Constituciones Iberoamericanas', *Anuario Iberoamericano de Justicia Constitucional* 6: 463–89
- Sarlet, I. W. 2004. *Dignidade da Pessoa Humana e Direitos Fundamentais*. Porto Alegre: Livraria do Advogado