# Rousseau and human dignity

THEO VERBEEK

Any discussion of Rousseau (1712–78)in connection with the notions of 'human dignity' and 'human rights' runs up against two problems. First of all, Rousseau rejects the idea that man would have an exalted place in nature – in fact, even primitive man is in a way disadvantaged as compared to other animals. The second problem is that Rousseau rejects the traditional notion of 'natural right' as an ideological ploy to protect the rich against the poor. These two problems are of course intimately connected, dignity, as conferred by reason and language, being since Grotius (1583–1645) the feature that serves as the basis of natural right. Nonetheless – and this is the real puzzle – the shadow of Rousseau hovers over any modern debate on human rights.

#### **Man's natural condition**

Many modern representatives of the natural right tradition make use of the idea of a state of nature, basically in two different ways. Either they postulate that in their 'natural state' men are driven by egoistic passions and engaged in a continual war of all against all, or they believe that by his very nature man is guided by the rule of reason and that he seeks a relation with his fellow men that corresponds to his specific dignity. In both cases, the creation of a civil society and a body politic would be a deliberate break with the past, which would be motivated either, as in Hobbes (1588–1679), by man's natural inclination to preserve his own being; or, as in Grotius and Locke (1632–1704), by the wish to protect and consolidate values of which man is naturally aware. Although therefore civil society is an artifact and in many respects constitutes a break with 'nature' it is in a way also 'natural', either because it embodies values inherent in human nature (the rule of reason), or because it is the prolongation, albeit with different means, of individual action; the enactment of a natural obligation or the best way to protect our own interests. In either case, we would sacrifice some of our 'natural' freedom but have something better in return, like safety, prosperity and culture.

Rousseau also makes use of the notion of a natural state. Although the state of nature as interpreted by him has some things in common with the state of nature as we know it from Hobbes, Grotius and Locke, it is also fundamentally different. Like Hobbes, Rousseau believes that primitive man is not by nature a social being; but unlike Hobbes he believes that there is no confrontation with other men either: man as he is produced by nature lives a solitary life – even the family is not a natural phenomenon, except for the protection of the very young. Accordingly, there is no war of all against all if only for the trivial reason that primitive man does not come across other human beings. Moreover, given the fact that ideally there is enough of everything, if he would meet other human beings, these would not primarily be rivals – the only reason why they could be of interest is as candidates to fulfil his sexual desires, which for that matter are neither as violent nor as permanent as in cultured man. Finally, natural man is compassionate and has feelings of pity with other sensitive beings (not just humans), so would not voluntarily engage in a war of all against all. Rousseau's most fundamental objection to all pictures of the state of nature, however, is that they present primitive man as if he would be modern man living under different conditions. Neither Hobbes nor Locke and Grotius would have understood that society – in fact, any form of social life – fundamentally changes the nature of man; that cultured man is different from primitive man, not just in degree but in kind. More particularly, primitive man would not have the use of reason and language; he would have no sense of good and evil; and he would in all respects be self-supportive. Accordingly, primitive man would have none of the qualities authors like Hobbes, Grotius and Locke see as inherently human.

Of course, this view of man's natural state also reflects on Rousseau's view of society. Whereas according to Hobbes even in the state of nature man constantly anticipates the desires and reactions of other men and plans his future in terms of those anticipations, Rousseau's primitive man lacks the power of reason and abstract thinking; he hardly anticipates the future, has no knowledge of the laws of nature, and never comes across situations in which the laws of nature could be applied had he known them. Accordingly, the civil society cannot be the result of a mental process in which the advantages and disadvantages of the present state are calculated and weighed against those of an imagined future; nor can it be seen as the fulfilment of a natural need or the enactment of a natural obligation. According to Rousseau, primitive life is essentially undynamic – given the fact that primitive man lacks the occasion to compare his own predicament with that of others and lacks the imagination to compare it with other possible conditions his natural state could have continued indefinitely. Inversely, the undeniable fact that eventually primitive life was replaced by a different type of life can be explained only as an historical accident – the result of a natural disaster presumably, an inundation or a volcanic eruption, which forced men either to migrate to a different climate or to suffer the intrusion of others who fled their own habitat. Social life, however, brought with it new needs, new dangers, perhaps also a new scarcity, and in any case new faculties. The use of language and as a result the birth of imagination and reason affected human relations in a profound and irreversible way, not to mention the passions, which, according to Rousseau, are not natural (the only strictly natural desires being those of survival and reproduction) but are a product of culture, and which, especially under the influence of the imagination (and language), become a destructive force and a source of unhappiness.

It is clear that *primitive man* as pictured by Rousseau has normative rather than explanatory value: man as he is produced by nature is perfect *because* he has not all the needs and faculties which social life demands and which civilization encourages him to develop. The only thing the idea of natural man *explains* is the uneasiness some people (Rousseau himself in the first place) experience in society. Accordingly, 'natural man' is a static and eternal norm, or ideal, meant to show that man as we know him is in fact produced by an 'unnatural' condition; that the conditions under which he has been forced to live turned him into a different animal, as different from natural man as a cat and a dog from a lion and a wolf. Moreover, by putting up this norm as an ideal, Rousseau suggests that, if man could manage to retain, or retrieve, certain essential features of his original condition he would restore some of primitive man's original nobility or dignity – his present condition on the other hand would be more akin to that of a slave. What are those essential features?

#### **Human dignity**

As it developed in the West the notion of 'human dignity' was based on the idea that man has an exalted place in nature; that he has certain essential and unique properties, like reason and freedom, which differentiate him from the rest of nature; and that this difference brings with it certain rights and duties, which, given the fact that they follow from human nature, are 'natural'. In this view, man shares many properties with other animals without being himself just an animal – properties which, despite the fact that he is much better than animal, still allow him to behave like an animal. This is wrong and the fact that it is wrong is shown by feelings like shame and remorse. A man should neither behave like an animal nor be treated as an animal. His proper 'humanity' therefore and as a result his specific 'dignity' or 'excellence' would express themselves in his power to restrain what is properly animal in him, namely, the passions. As a result, 'dignity' would not be a static property; it would be something one can lose by behaving like an animal, but also something one deserves; it imposes duties but also confers rights. This ideal is eminently incorporated in the Stoic, or Neo-Platonic, or Christian Sage who after a long struggle, against the passions and against social conventions, acquires a state of perfection.

None of this could be the case according to Rousseau given the fact that what is said to be properly human (reason and language) is according to him the artificial product of an unnatural situation, whereas what would be properly animal (the passions) is in fact properly human (even though it is not part of human nature). Even so, Rousseau's primitive man has almost all the properties the Stoics ascribe to their Sage, more particularly, independence (autonomy) and imperturbability, except that primitive man does not have to acquire those properties in a struggle against the passions (which he has not), or against social conventions (which do not apply), but has them by his own nature. To that extent one could say that Rousseau's primitive man has a certain dignity; that he is the eminent instantiation of human nature. However, man has lost that condition and, according to Rousseau, there is no way to return to it no more than there is for a cat to return to the condition of the lion or the puma; even if there would be a place where 'natural' conditions still obtain (Africa, the American forests), we are too far removed from our own nature to be able to survive under those conditions. The challenge therefore is not to restore man's natural dignity but to retrieve as many as possible of the features defining man's original dignity under conditions which are not 'natural'.

Again, despite the fact that primitive man is physically fit (Rousseau tends to see illness and disease as consequences of civilization and even of medicine), he lacks reason and language, which accordingly cannot be what conferred dignity. However, even primitive man has some properties which differentiate him from other animals. Whereas these are guided by their natural instinct, man has no natural instinct but has the power to learn by imitating other animals – his disadvantage with respect to other animals is compensated by the possibility to perfect himself. Even so, that property is not the reason why Rousseau speaks of primitive man in glowing terms – indeed, according to him primitive man has no need to perfect himself. All one can say therefore is that perfectibility helped man to survive under conditions that, being not 'natural', were new for him. His real 'nobility', however, lies in the fact that he is independent; that he has no business with other people; that he does not need anything or anyone; that he can do whatever he wants to do without worrying about the reactions of others. In a word, his nobility consists in the fact that he completely is what he appears to be – that he is completely transparent. People living in society, however, are always characterized by a dissociation between what they appear to be and what they really are – a dissociation made possible by reason and language and made necessary, not only by the passions, which more often than not make it necessary to hide our true motives, but also by economic and social pressure. The introduction of property – the fact that, as Rousseau formulates it, at some point someone claims a piece of land as his own and that others are stupid enough to believe him – but also the emergence of specialized trades and competences – the blacksmith – create dependence and inequality, which in turn force us to hide our true selves and betray our true feelings, so much so that many people are not even aware of the misery of their own being. They like it and defend the civil society and the law – they find their advocates in the natural right theorists, whose role accordingly is purely ideological. In Rousseau's view, it is no coincidence that they all start with a theory of property.

#### **Authenticity**

Can the natural properties in virtue of which primitive man had a certain nobility and dignity be reproduced under unnatural conditions? In other words, can natural dignity be restored without returning to the original condition of mankind? Even more fundamentally perhaps, in what way can this notion of the original nobility of man serve as the basis for the deduction of a system of justice, given the fact that the traditional deduction is a fraud? Finally, can the progressive degradation of civilized man and the corresponding erosion of moral values be stopped? In sum, is the notion of primitive man simply a nostalgic ideal, which definitively belongs to the past, or can it provide moral and political guidance?

Again, according to Rousseau the evils of society and civilization are numerous. Apart from the fact that social ties are an emotional and psychological burden, there are basically two factors which make life in even a relatively primitive society morally problematic: (1) human relations lack sincerity – people are not what they appear to be; (2) human relations are characterized by mutual dependence – people depend on each other, not only for their material goods, but also insofar as they wish to be confirmed in their values and opinions. These two factors are intimately connected: dependence creates inequality; inequality creates duplicity; duplicity is made possible and is reinforced by the faculties developed in society (reason and language). In other words, dependence not only leads to a loss of dignity, but also creates a moral problem. But what if dependence cannot be avoided?

Rousseau does not have a single solution and in any case none of his suggested solutions are perfectly convincing. The first is education. The system proposed in *Emile* (1762) rests on the idea that education must help the child to discover, consolidate and fortify its own self. Indeed, given the fact that authenticity is no longer given, it must be learned and if learned fortified and protected. However, it can be learned only in complete isolation, out of reach for the harmful influences of society and civilization and under the guidance of a tutor who, unlike ordinary human beings, has managed to remain himself authentic. Another solution could be found in the personal strategies adopted by Rousseau himself and described in his autobiographical writings: one can avoid other people and withdraw in a 'wilderness' – usually a large house with a large garden. In fact, autobiography as such, provided it is done with humility, sincerity and integrity, can be a way of recovering authenticity. Apart from everything else, all these 'solutions' are primarily individual. They aim either at the preservation and consolidation of an original self or at a 'conversion' – it is no coincidence that the title given to Rousseau's main autobiographical book (the *Confessions*, published after Rousseau's death in 1782 and 1789) is that of the story of a conversion (Augustine's *Confessiones*). Although therefore they address authenticity as a psychological challenge, they ignore what seemed to make the loss of authenticity inevitable, namely, the various forms of dependence and inequality (economic, social, intellectual, emotional) created by society.

The solution described in the *Contrat social* (1762) on the other hand, which is primarily political, rests on the assumption that we can achieve authenticity by unconditionally and unreservedly identifying with a community. If our individual will were to be indistinguishable from the general will, whatever we do in conformity with the general will would by definition be an expression of our true and authentic self. Accordingly, Rousseau's *social contract* is not, as it is for Hobbes, a contract in the juridical sense of the word, that is, a voluntary agreement by which we promise to give up something (freedom) in exchange for something else (safety and prosperity) – if only because, according to Rousseau, freedom is not a commodity that can be exchanged. By entering it we do not create a new *Leviathan* in order to pursue our individual goals more successfully (that is the reason why the general will is not necessarily identical with the will of the majority), but we give ourselves new goals, which in turn will turn us into a new kind of human being. In fact, the *social contract* is best compared with the creation of a mystic body which allows us to transcend our own individuality and achieve a higher level of humanity.

Even Rousseau would probably admit that this is no more than an abstract theoretical model based on the perfectly abstract argument that, as soon as there is no longer any distinction between our will and the general will, 'obedience', that is, the subordination of an individual will to the will of another individual (or other individuals), becomes logically impossible. In its abstract form, moreover, the argument seems to amount to a sophism – as if to cease being a slave all the slave would have to do is to see the will of his master as his own will. However, it is not as simple as that. The general will is *general*, not only as to its *subject*, which is the collective body of men from which it emerges, but also as to its *object*. The object of the general will is by definition not limited to the interest of an individual or even of the majority of the individuals that compose a community but extends to the community as such; indeed, it is perfectly conceivable that the individual interests of all members of that community are sacrificed to the common good as it is willed by the general will. Accordingly, even though the general will can be interpreted by an individual for the rest of the community – as Robespierre (1758–94) would believe he did – it is never his own individual will that he speaks nor his own individual interest that he considers. Inversely, the various forms of dependence and inequality created by society are an objective evil only insofar as they entail an individual's obedience to the will of another individual or a group of individuals; they are eliminated by replacing that particular dependence and that particular obedience by a general will to which all willingly conform, not because they must or because it is in their interest, but because they understand that in doing so they achieve a higher form of humanity. As a result, it would be possible to retrieve our original nobility by a reform of society such that all forms of individual obedience are eliminated and replaced by a general will with which all can identify and in which all equally participate.

It seems then that dignity does not reside in a static attribute of mankind, in virtue of which man would be radically different from the rest of nature, but is an effect of man's relation with his fellow men. According to this view, an individual man *has* dignity in the state of nature only because it is only then that he is completely independent and completely autonomous. He loses that dignity as soon as he becomes social and has to adapt to other people. In fact, most people have no dignity at all, given the fact that, with a mind and a body deformed by society and civilization, they cannot even imagine that their lives lack authenticity. Individually or collectively, they can try and regain some of their original dignity but in this they depend, again, on the willingness of others to do the same. These two features constitute a radical departure from the traditional view of human dignity. Dignity is no longer a status in virtue of which an individual has rights and duties but something which to a large measure depends on others: it is through the mere presence of others that we lose it and it is only with others that we can regain it.

Again, Rousseau rejects the traditional foundation of natural right – the notions of right and justice have nothing to do with the natural condition of man but are at best, like reason and language, tools designed to cope with an essentially unnatural condition. It must be presumed that, as long as the society which produced them is not reformed in the sense of the *contrat social*, they must be a travesty of true justice. It is only against the backdrop of the social contract that it becomes possible to speak of rights and duties – indeed, these can be defined and respected only by the general will. And, although Rousseau frequently protests that the general will by definition operates in conformity with virtue and that, if it does not, it would cease to be a truly general will, the only rule he provides is that the object of the general will must be general, that is, that it must never be directed at the promotion of some particular or individual interest. This means that there is nothing by which an individual could *judge* the general will; on the contrary, by judging it and even by being willing to judge it, one dissociates from it and shows that, as yet, one has not attained a superior level of humanity. Accordingly, there is nothing above the general will; it is only through the general will that moral principles can be discovered. Nor is it clear what must guide the interpreter of the general will, that is, the government. Although it is unlikely that Rousseau would have approved the government of Robespierre, there is little in his system that prevents a Robespierre from proclaiming himself the interpreter of the general will as long as he finds a population which in his words and deeds recognize the expression of the general will.

The same problem returns on a more individual level. Even if it is granted that duplicity is wrong, it is not clear in what sense an authentic life is always *morally* better. The uninhibited *mafioso* may be more 'authentic' than the man who wants to kill his wife but is restrained by the law, but he is not necessarily 'better'. Moreover, we do have passions and feelings which may cause conflicts with the general will. Do we know at all what it means to be 'authentic'? Paradoxically, Rousseau himself seems to be aware of that problem. In *Julie ou la nouvelle H´elo¨ıse* (1761), he relates the sad story of Julie, who cannot marry the man she loves and by whom she is loved (Saint-Preux), and is forced to marry the nobleman to whom she was promised (Baron de Wolmar). Wolmar in turn marries her to save her from ignominy; he respects and honours her but he is not in love with her; he knows of her passion for Saint-Preux but is confident that eventually it will be over; and he even considers the possibility of engaging Saint-Preux as the governor of his children. Naturally, the situation creates unhappiness and distress in Julie as well as Saint-Preux. However, their moral suffering is in marked contrast with the equanimity and wisdom of Wolmar, who is not only a perfect husband but also the perfect manager of his estate. In all respects this is an ideal place, where even the servants are happy. Economically self-sufficient, it serves clearly as the model of an ideal commonwealth, in which all parties have only one goal, namely, the common good. This makes the story characteristically hard to interpret. Does it mean that it is wrong to sacrifice one's feelings to social conventions (which is where it all starts); or on the contrary that personal feelings should be sacrificed to the greater good of the community; or does it mean perhaps that the passion of love is wrong and unnatural and that Julie and Saint-Preux should have been wiser? Whose life is the more 'authentic' – that of Julie, of Wolmar, or of Saint-Preux? And to what extent is their authenticity conditioned by society? Is Wolmar, who never leaves his estate and seems to lack all curiosity for the world outside, more authentic than Saint-Preux, who travels more or less permanently in a restless bid to forget his love? Is Julie less authentic than her cousin Claire who, although she has nice feelings for Saint-Preux, refuses to marry him because she is not really in love or is she more authentic because, without forsaking her duties as a wife, she is true to her feelings of love? Or is the message simply that, given the 'unnaturalness' of our present condition, tragic conflicts like this are inevitable and that we will be freed from them only gradually and after the necessary reforms are in place?

#### **Conclusion**

The aim of Rousseau's political theory is neither to explain the working of government, nor to reconstruct the rights and duties of the citizens, but to solve an essentially anthropological problem, namely, that we can never entirely 'be ourselves'. The question is, not only whether that problem admits of a political solution, but also what exactly it would mean 'to be ourselves'. The injunction 'be yourself' is empty as long as one does not know what 'self' means – knowledge which is probably denied to people living under the perverted conditions of civilization. The only way Rousseau can demonstrate what he means is to imagine a man who has no real needs because he does not have the means to imagine what he is missing, and who is stripped of everything which, according to most people, would make him properly human: reason, language and the passions. Rousseau's real point therefore seems to be that those are not original features of mankind; that they are produced by an 'unnatural' condition; that the reason why people are miserable is that they have those faculties. Again, according to Rousseau dignity is not a status which could invariably be ascribed to mankind. Whether an individual has or does not have it depends on the kind of society he lives in. Accordingly, an individual is never entirely free to live in accordance with his original dignity. Indeed, there would be more reason to speak of an original indignity given the fact that we are born into a society which like most societies is still in want of reform. As long as that reform is wanting authenticity will be a rare virtue. As a result, the dream of authenticity is projected into a mythical and utopian future. These are innovative aspects of Rousseau's theory which ever since the end of the 18th century have been part of the discourse on human dignity and natural rights.

Moreover, although the version of it presented by Rousseau himself is pathological, the uneasiness he describes as being inherent to social life is familiar. It is the uneasiness caused by the fact that social, political and economic realities constantly demand compromises; that in many situations many people (including politicians) do not know what to do or to think; that most people have their life lived for them. Rousseau not only addresses those feelings but also suggests that there is a political solution; that by a reform of society people will finally be able 'to be themselves'. That, too, is a familiar feature of the modern discourse on natural rights and perhaps of modern political discourse generally. However, Rousseau describes that reform in a formal way only as a condition in which the individual wills that compose a specific body of men spontaneously merge into a general will, thus giving rise to a society which replaces dependence and inequality with 'authenticity'. What kind of structural reforms that entails cannot be said before the general will is in place and has found competent interpreters; nor is it clear in what way life after such a reform will be different from life now, except that it will be different. It was left to the political movements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to provide a more precise and, in most cases, a more sinister, meaning.

#### **References**

- Jellinek, G. 1901. *The Declaration of the Rights of Men and Citizens: A Contribution to Modern Constitutional History*, trans. M. Farrand. New York: Holt (online edition, http://oll.libertyfund.org/index)
- Rousseau, J. J. 1994. *Discourse on the Origin of Inequality*, trans. F. Philip. Oxford University Press

2004. *The Social Contract*, trans. M. Cranston. London: Penguin

- Scott, J. T. (trans.). 2012. *The Major Political Writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau*. Chicago University Press