# Dignity only for humans? On the dignity and inherent value of non-human beings 

PETER SCHABER

In 1992, an article was incorporated by referendum in the Swiss Constitution mandating that the federal government regulations on the use of genetic material should take into account the dignity of non-human beings. Paragraph 1 of the article states:

The federal government shall issue regulations on the use of the genetic material of animals, plants, and other organisms. It thereby shall take into account, the dignity of non-human beings ['*die W¨urde der Kreatur*'] as well as the safety of human beings, animals, and the environment, and shall protect the genetic diversity of animal and plant species.

According to the legal interpretation, the dignity of non-human beings pertains to all individual organisms, animals, plants and micro-organisms. What is meant by the dignity of non-human beings? How does it relate to human dignity? And why should we ascribe it to all non-human beings? If animals had dignity, their moral status might be the same or at least close to the one humans have. They might have, provided that dignity is the basis of human rights, the same rights humans have. On the other hand, if they do not have dignity, the rights humans have might trump the claims that could be made on behalf of animals.

#### **Non-human and human dignity**

One might argue that the dignity of non-human beings is just an extension of the concept of human dignity. What we ascribe to humans when we talk of their dignity is also something that should be ascribed to non-humans. Of course, the meaning of the concept of human dignity is contested. But, one could argue, whatever turns out to be the proper understanding of human dignity, it should also be ascribed to non-humans. But why should we do this? Advocates of the view that we should extend dignity to all living organisms give two reasons: first, humans would not have the properties due to which they have dignity if there were no other living organisms. Dignity pertains also to the necessary conditions of the properties which convey dignity to humans. Second, Living organisms have their own teleonomic structure, they are beings that pursue their own ends.

The first argument provides us with a reason to extend dignity not just to all living organisms, but rather to all natural entities on which the dignityconveying properties of humans depend. This does not correspond to what the official understanding of Article 120 of the Swiss Constitution demands, yet one could think that this is what should be done. Taking the argument seriously, one would have to draw an even more radical conclusion and argue that all natural preconditions for human dignity in the world have dignity themselves.

The argument presupposes an idea of conditionality that says: X is a necessary condition for Y; Y has dignity, so has dignity as well. In other words, dignity has to be ascribed to X because it is a condition without which beings would not have dignity.

But it is not clear why this should follow. The normative properties we ascribe to something do not necessarily correspond to the normative properties we ascribe to their necessary conditions. There would be no valuable things if there were no atoms. But this in itself is not seen as a reason to ascribe value to atoms. And, in addition: the conditionality argument might, in the dignity case, prove too much: if the conditions that are necessary for beings to have dignity therefore have dignity as well, then not just living beings, but most non-living entities such as molecules and electrons, would have dignity. It is not clear whether this extension of human dignity can sensibly be defended.

#### **Inherent value**

Some authors argue that the dignity of non-human beings should not be taken as an extension of human dignity, but should be understood in a different way. Ascribing dignity to non-human beings, according to this view, is just saying that they have inherent value, that is: a value they have independently of the value they have for other beings. Their inherent value can be understood as moral status: they count for their own sake. Our behaviour towards them should be restricted, not by reasons that are based on our interests and needs, but by reasons that result from the affirmation that they possess value. In other words, that non-human beings have inherent value means that we should behave morally towards them, irrespective of the value they have for human beings as well as for other living beings.

Why should inherent value be ascribed to non-human beings? Many hold the view that non-human beings have inherent value due to the fact that they have an individual good. Things can happen and be done to them which are good or bad for them. What it means for something to be good or bad for a non-human being can be understood (a) in a subjectivist way and (b) in a objectivist way. According to the subjectivist view, things are good or bad for non-human beings when they experience them as good or bad, respectively. And, according to the objectivist view, things are good and bad for non-human beings without being experienced by them as such. Supporters of the subjectivist position hence limit inherent value to sentient beings, while supporters of the objectivist position take all living beings to have inherent value.

The subjectivist position cannot account for the intuition that it would be wrong to use drugs or breeding techniques to make sure that, for instance, pigs could tolerate extremely restrictive living conditions without experiencing it as bad. The subjectivist view could not object to such a practice, because it is not bad for the pig according to this view, given that it does not experience it as bad. This can be seen as a reason to reject the subjectivist position. It leaves us with the objectivist position and requires us to extend inherent value to all living beings whose lives can sensibly be judged in terms of quality. But what exactly does it mean to have a good of one's own? An answer is needed to determine what it means to take the inherent value of a being into account either by respecting or by promoting it. Three answers have been given.

According to the first proposal, the inherent value of a living being is preserved when this being is capable of developing into a typical representative of the species it belongs to. The individual's own good refers to certain species-specific features that distinguish the individual as a member of its species. On this view, it is the purpose of living beings to develop their species-specific features. This is, for instance, not the case with Tracy, the transgenic sheep, who produces the pharmaceutical product Alpha-1-Antitryspin (AAT) in her milk. Tracy's situation fails to live up to this aim, given that producing pharmaceutical products is not what sheep normally do. Tracy does not possess the speciesspecific features of a sheep, even though the transgenic change does not infringe upon her functioning. To respect the dignity of living beings is to respect their species-specific features.

According to the second proposal, the inherent value of a living being is respected when its genetic make-up is preserved. In other words, a living being lives a good life when its individual genetic make-up develops to maturity. Given that breeding does not change the individual genetic make-up, this position allows animal husbandry, but it does prohibit the production of transgenic animals. Breeders do not change the individual genetic make-up. Genetic engineering does change the genetic make-up, and is thus, on this view, incompatible with the inherent value of the beings concerned. It must be stressed that this is held to be wrong not because it violates the species' limits, but rather because it allows for the possibility to infringe upon the individual value of the living being itself.

According to the third proposal, the individual good of a living being is related to those functions and operations that a member of the species can normally perform. Any reduction or limitation of an individual's capabilities infringes on the good of a being and disrespects its inherent value. This is the case regardless of whether the concerned individual is able to realize it or not. On this view, the individual good of a living being does not consist in this individual being able to develop all species-specific features. It rather consists in its being able to perform those functions a member of its species can normally perform (for example, growth, reproduction, motion or social functioning). An infringement of such functions would interfere with the good of the living being and thus be a way of disrespecting its inherent value. The dignity of living beings is violated if the individual being's own good is infringed upon. And this is the case if the living being is prevented from performing those functions that members of the species can normally perform.

To illustrate the three positions: the dignity of Tracy, the transgenic sheep, is infringed upon according to the first position because the change in its genes prevents it from living the life of a normal sheep, producing a pharmaceutical product sheep normally do not produce. Given that its genetic make-up has not been preserved, its dignity is also violated if we follow the second proposal. However, it need not be violated according to the third proposal, provided Tracy is able to live out her normal functioning (for example, be able to move, grow, reproduce and live together with other sheep).

#### **An equivocation?**

Finally, one has to ask whether the talk of dignity of living beings is just an equivocation. Is what is meant by the inherent value of beings completely different from human dignity? Does the inherent value of beings share certain essential features with human dignity? The answer depends, of course, on what we mean by human dignity. Authors in a Kantian tradition think that dignity does not allow for any trade-offs. Human dignity should not be weighed against other values. Thus, violations of dignity cannot be justified by the advantages such violations would bring about. The dignity of humans trumps any advantage in terms of any kind of value, no matter how great.

Could it be true that we would never be justified in impairing functions a cow would normally perform, however big the benefits were we could expect from doing so? It is unlikely that this form of trumping could sensibly be linked to the inherent value of non-human beings. And this is also probably not what was aimed for in the Swiss Constitution.

It can also be questioned whether the inherent value of non-living beings has anything to do with human dignity if the latter is understood as what is paradigmatically violated by acts of humiliation and degradation. It is hard to imagine that non-human beings can be the objects of such kinds of treatment. If human dignity is taken in such a sense, the inherent value of non-human beings must be understood in a different way.

There is the further question whether the concept of inherent value has moral significance (see Chapter 60 of this volume). The answer to this question depends on the meaning of the concept of inherent value. It might be understood as referring to reasons for action: 'X has inherent value' then means: 'The properties due to which X has an inherent value are reasons to treat and not treat it in certain ways.' The latter need not be objects of moral duties we have. It might in a much weaker sense be something we should do.

If living beings have inherent value, then certain treatments are appropriate, others are not. To destroy or to fail to promote the good on which the inherent value of a being is based must then be regarded as inappropriate, if not, depending on the concept of inherent value, as morally wrong. The inherent value of a being should be respected, preserved or promoted. This is not because this would serve the purposes human beings pursue. Living beings must rather be treated in these ways because of what they are. More precisely, they must be treated this way because of the properties that give them inherent value. What this amounts to might differ from what we owe to the inherent dignity of humans. But it might be what is actually meant by the talk of the dignity of creatures.

#### **References**

- Attfield, R. 1995. 'Genetic Engineering: Can Unnatural Kinds be Wronged?', in P. Wheale and R. McNally (eds.), *Animal Genetic Engineering: Of Pigs, Oncomice, and Men*. London: Pluto Press, 201–10
- Balzer, P., Rippe, K. P., and Schaber, P. 1998. *Menschenw¨urde vs W¨urde der Kreatur: Begriffsbestimmung, Gentechnik, Ethikkommissionen*. Freiburg im Breisgau, Munich: Alber
	- 2000. 'Two Concepts of Dignity for Humans and Non-Human Organisms in the Context of Genetic Engineering', *Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics* 13: 7–27
- Fox, M. 1990. 'Transgenic Animals: Ethical and Animal Welfare Concerns', in P. Wheale and R. McNally (eds.), *The Bio Revolution, Cornucopia or Pandora's Box*. London: Pluto Press, 31–45
- Heeger, R. 2000. 'Genetic Engineering and the Dignity of Creatures', *Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics* 13: 43–51
- Praetorius, I., and Saladin, P. 1996. *Die W¨urde der Kreatur*, Schriftenreihe Umwelt No. 260, Bern
- Rolston, H. 1988. *Environmental Ethics: Duties to and Values in The Natural World*, Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press
- Saladin, P., and Schweizer, R. 1995. *Kommentar zu Art. 24novies*, in J. Aubert *et al*. (eds.), *Kommentar zur Bundesverfassung der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft*. Basel, Zurich, Bern: Helbing und Lichtenhahn/Schulthess, St ¨ ampfli, ¨ 58–73
- Singer, P. 1993. *Practical Ethics*. Cambridge University Press
- Sitter-Liver, B. 1995. 'Wurde der Kreatur: Grundlegung, Bedeutung, Funktion eines ¨ neuen Verfassungsprinzips', in J. Nida-Rumelin and D. V. d. Pfordten (eds.), ¨ *Okologische Ethik und Rechtstheorie ¨* . Baden-Baden: Nomos, 355–64
- Taylor, P.1986. *Respect for Nature: A Theory of Environmental Ethics*. Princeton University Press