### Human dignity, immigration and refugees GORAN COLLSTE ¨

The aim of this chapter is to inquire how the principle of human dignity applies to the political question of the treatment of immigrants and refugees. Human dignity is often given two related meanings: first, the intrinsic and equal value of each human being; and, second, a dignified human life, i.e. a life lived under decent conditions. Decent conditions imply for example freedom and education, as well as the absence of repression, torture and starvation. Both meanings are related to human rights; owing to her intrinsic value each human being has rights to freedom, health etc. Human dignity in the second sense informs us about the requirements for a decent human life, i.e. the content of human rights (Collste 2002).

Refugees and immigrants1 are in a vulnerable position. They are forced to leave their homes and are potential victims of exploitation and extortion. This chapter deals primarily with the political and ethical conditions for respecting the human dignity of immigrants and refugees. How can a 'global political practice' (Heuser 2008: 71) of respecting their dignity be justified from a moral point of view? There is a link between arguments for human dignity, human rights and moral cosmopolitanism. According to moral cosmopolitanism, the individual human being is the ultimate unit of worth and entitled to equal consideration regardless of such contingencies as nationality and citizenship (Beitz 1999; Tan 2004).

I will start by reiterating some basic facts concerning immigrants and refugees in the twenty-first century. What are the numbers? Where do immigrants and refugees come from and where do they go? Then I present the moral and legal status of refugees in international politics and regulations. Primary documents are the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Geneva Convention of 1951. Next, I draw attention to the views of Immanuel Kant and Hannah Arendt, two philosophers who have contributed to the ethical discourse on the rights

<sup>1</sup> In this chapter 'immigrant' refers to economic and social immigrants, i.e. individuals who because of poverty or unjust social conditions leave their countries to get a better life elsewhere. Business people, employees, students, volunteers etc. who go abroad for other reasons are not included.

of refugees; and finally I discuss how human rights of immigrant and refugees can be protected in an age characterized by globalization.

#### **Immigrants and refugees**

The number of international immigrants has risen continuously during the last twenty years. In 1990, the total number was 155 million, and in 2013, the figure had risen to 230 million. This means that, in 2013, around 3 per cent of the world's population consisted of international immigrants. About 60 per cent of the immigrants are localized in the more developed regions and 40 per cent in less developed regions. China, India and the Philippines are the three major migrant-sending countries, whereas the US, Russia and Germany host the largest numbers of international immigrants. 'Push factors' that motivate migration are poverty, political instability and, presumably in the future, climate-related changes of the natural environment (United Nations Population Division 2013; International Organization for Migration 2010; Gibney 2004).

In 2012, there were a total of 15 million refugees and 29 million internally displaced persons in the world. Major source countries of refugees are Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, Syria and Congo, i.e. recent conflict zones, and the major refugee hosting countries are Pakistan, Iran, Syria and Germany. The main reason for refugees leaving their country is war, and usually they go to neighbouring countries. The vast majority of refugees stay in a host country for a shorter or longer period of time before they return to their home country, while a minority (2–10 per cent) resettles in the hosting country (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 2012).

Amnesty International and other NGOs continuously report on the maltreatment of refugees and immigrants. For example, in European border countries like Greece and Italy, they are often treated as criminals and detained in subhuman conditions. Since the 1990s, female refugees from war zones have been extremely badly off. In the war in the former Yugoslavia as well as in a number of African countries, rape has become a method of warfare intended not only to hurt individual women but also to undermine culture and morals (Stop Rape Now 2010; Amnesty International 2013).

#### **International law and morals**

Human rights are moral claims of particular importance. They belong to every individual human being assuring him or her equal status irrespective of nationality, race or sex. Human rights are universal and equal; no human being has more human rights than any other.

In the evolution of human rights, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is of special significance. Several articles of the UDHR relate to questions of refugee status and immigration. Article 6 affirms that every individual, irrespective of citizenship, has a right to equal treatment before the law. This is a universal right valid across national borders. Article 13 deals with freedom of movement. To migrate – both within a country and across national borders – is thus a human right.

Article 14 deals especially with the questions of refugee status and asylum. According to Article 14(1): 'Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.' Finally, Article 15 secures a right to nationality.

Someone's right presupposes someone else's obligation. The UDHR signatories are nation-states. Hence, nation-states are both the guarantors *of* and the primary agents *for* the enforcement of human rights within their borders. States have obligations to fulfil human rights. However, as regards Article 14, there is an asymmetry: refugee rights do not correspond to particular obligations of states. Refugees leave their home country due to persecution and suppression, i.e. due to the fact that their human rights are violated. Who then has the obligation to secure their rights as refugees? Does any particular nation have an obligation to guarantee refugee status to any particular refugee who happens to cross its borders? Is the obligation shared among the signatories of the UDHR? Alas, so far these questions have no positive answers.

In order to strengthen the responsibility to protect refugees, the Geneva Refugee Convention was adopted in 1951. At the time the Convention referred primarily to European war refugees, but its scope was expanded in the 1967 Protocol. Besides defining the meaning of 'refugee' (see below), the Geneva Convention also proclaims ways to protect refugees' human rights. Refugees are granted a fair hearing and permission to stay in the country while they seek asylum. The Convention explicitly prohibits the expulsion of refugees; the so-called 'non-*refoulement*' principle. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has the mandate to monitor the worldwide implementation of the Geneva Convention. However, the UNHCR's status is weak in relation to states due to the fact that it is not given any formal authority (Loescher 1999: 245f). Hence, unlike immigrants, refugees have some internationally recognized rights of protection. Who then is a refugee?

#### **Who is a refugee?**

Refugees are in a vulnerable situation and in need of protection. The Geneva Convention defines 'refugee' as:

[a]ny person who, owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or . . . unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country . . .

Reasons for being granted refugee status are persecution caused by race, religion, or nationality and persecution due to political membership and political opinion. The definition is open to different interpretations and affirms some limitations that might be questioned. What, for example, does 'well-founded fear' imply? Is it based on the individual's subjective views or on political conditions in the country of origin? What counts as a 'social group'? Why is persecution for reasons of sexual orientation not included (Carens 2003)?

One should observe that the Geneva Convention refers to 'any person' as a potential refugee. To differentiate between potential immigrants or refugees on the basis of, for example, race, religion or ethnicity would clearly conflict with the principle of human dignity (Carens 2003).

According to the Geneva Convention, individuals who leave their country of origin due to social and economic reasons are excluded from obtaining refugee status. Is this distinction between political and economic reasons for migration reasonable? Political refugees have strong reasons for needing protection. They must leave their countries because they are threatened by imprisonment or perhaps even death. On the other hand, social and economic deprivation is not – *prima facie* – less threatening for the individual than political repression. As a consequence, migration caused by severe poverty in case of a government that cannot or will not protect the basic economic rights of its citizens could also count as a moral reason for the wealthier nations to open their borders (Shacknove 1984).

#### **Rights of foreigners**

As long as the principle of human dignity is materialized in *state-centred* human rights, refugees will remain in a vulnerable position. By leaving their home country they are less protected. Immanuel Kant tried to compensate for this in his cosmopolitan treatise, *On Perpetual Peace*. The third article claims that 'The rights of men, as citizens of the world, shall be limited to the conditions of universal hospitality' (Kant1992:137). Notably, Kant emphasizes that hospitality is not philanthropy, i.e. dependent on the goodwill of the host, but *a right* foreigners hold. Seyla Benhabib comments that for Kant the right of hospitality occupies the space 'between the right of humanity in our person and the rights that accrue to us insofar as we are members of specific republics' (Benhabib 2004: 27).

Hannah Arendt discusses the fate of the millions of people who became stateless after the two world wars (Arendt 1951). The result, according to Arendt, was that '[t]he Rights of Man, supposedly inalienable, proved to be unenforceable . . . whenever people appeared who were no longer citizens of any sovereign state' (Arendt 1951: 372). The emergence of millions of refugees without rights illustrated the weakness of the metaphysical justifications of human rights and human dignity as 'inalienable' or in 'the image of God'. How, then, can the rights of every individual be guaranteed and have practical implications, asks Arendt (Arendt 1951: 378f). How can human rights of refugees be justified and guaranteed today? Arendt's problem has become even more acute in an age of globalization.

#### **Human dignity and the rights of refugees and immigrants**

In the present ethical discussion, some influential views leave refugees and immigrants without structural protection. They will instead depend on the goodwill of the decision-makers in the receiving country. One finds this situation theoretically justified in the nationalist position expressed by the political philosophers Michael Walzer and David Miller. According to nationalism, the receiving countries have the right to decide admission criteria. Walzer argues that nations are like clubs and the citizens/club members have the right to distribute membership to others according to their will (Walzer 1983: 40). Walzer's argument supporting this claim is that the integrity of a community should be protected, but the side-effect is that immigrants and refugees have no right to claim asylum. Miller argues that liberal states are entitled to close their borders to immigrants to protect their culture and control their populations (Miller 2005: 199f). Refugees belong to a different category from citizens. Although they have basic rights and deserve protection, no particular state has an obligation to admit any specific refugees. Miller hopes that states will informally agree on a fair distribution of responsibilities (Miller 2005: 203).

If we assume that each human being has equal worth and as a consequence some basic rights to protection and subsistence, both Walzer's and Miller's positions are inadequate. Their positions may imply that nationalist interests outweigh the universal principle of human dignity. Furthermore, their reference to the protection of national culture is controversial in an age of globalization and multiculturalism (Scheffler 2007).

As we saw, Article 14 of the UDHR states the rights of refugees. This indicates that human rights are not equivalent to citizen rights. How, then, can the principle of human dignity justify the rights of refugees and immigrants? And what are the political implications in an age characterized by globalization?

Let me start by discussing a Kantian approach. Duties to immigrants and refugees can be justified by both the first and the second versions of Kant's Categorical Imperative. We, who are citizens of affluent and relatively secure nationstates, can imagine situations when the political or social situation changes and we would be forced to leave our countries due to repression or poverty. In this hypothetical situation, we want protection and/or asylum and, hence, it would be irrational for us to will a law that did not provide immigrants and refugees with protection and/or asylum. Thus, it is a duty to protect immigrants and refugees. Second, to respect the rights of immigrants and refugees is to treat them as ends in themselves (Kant 1983). Thus, there is a duty to respect the rights of immigrants and refugees.

Seyla Benhabib develops the Kantian approach in a discourse-ethical direction. She articulates a 'post-metaphysical' justification for rights based on mutual respect for personal autonomy and communicative freedom. This then forms the basis for a human right to membership. The right to membership is more general and fundamental than specific political or citizen's rights. She concludes:

In this sense, the human right to membership is an aspect of the principle of right, i.e. of the recognition of the individual as a being who is entitled to moral respect. (Benhabib 2004: 141f)

Benhabib's idea of 'the human right to membership' needs to be anchored in institutions that go beyond the nation-state. Citizenship is no longer the ultimate ground for rights. The disaggregation of citizenship is, as she writes, 'an inescapable aspect of contemporary globalization' (Benhabib 2004: 173). Cosmopolitan norms justifying the rights of immigrants and refugees should be embedded, contextualized and incorporated through 'democratic iteration' of public deliberation.

In John Rawls' theory of justice, human dignity adopts a foundational role. Rawls' idea of a contract is based on the assumption that humans are free and rational and treat each other with mutual respect as equals. The aim of a just society is to realize basic human rights and equality. How then could the rights of immigrants and refugees be granted from a Rawlsian perspective? Rawls himself is bleak when it comes to questions of immigration and refugees. The problem of immigration will, according to Rawls in *The Law of Peoples* (1999), be eliminated in a realistic utopia, i.e. in a world where a law of peoples is established.

However, it is possible to reconstruct Rawls' theory in a cosmopolitan direction. This is important today not least because the weakening of the nation-state as a result of globalization (Beitz 1979; Pogge 1989; Tan 2004).

Immigration is, as we noted, clearly an aspect of globalization. Increased knowledge of the living conditions in wealthy societies provides a pull for people in poverty-stricken nations to try to get there. Boats crossing the Mediterranean overfull with Africans wanting to go to Europe, and Latin-Americans trying to cross the border between Mexico and the US, are illustrative examples.

One way to develop a theoretical grounding for the rights of immigrants and refugees is to imagine a global contract including all persons of the world deliberating on the appropriate principles of justice behind a 'veil of ignorance'. Would a global contract justify free immigration without borders? Not necessarily. As Joseph Carens argues, if unrestricted immigration would lead to chaos and the breakdown of social institutions this is an argument to restrict the freedom of immigration (Carens 1987: 259). Second, principles of global justice might be better realized through other means than open borders. Those who are desperately poor and risk their lives in trying to cross the Mediterranean or the border between Mexico and the US would perhaps benefit more from other redistributive measures (Brock 2009: 193). And the refugees of political suppression would possibly benefit more from a democratic development in their home countries than from a right to asylum in an alien one. On the other hand, these are not mutually exclusive alternatives. Even if the ultimate goals are the realization of social equality and democracy on a global level, more liberal immigration and asylum laws admitting entrance to a larger number of immigrants and refugees would most likely in the short run be a step towards justice. Today, poor countries receive the major portion of refugees. A global contract put demands on the wealthier nations to take greater responsibility.

To sum up: the argument has focused on how the dignity and rights of immigrants and refugees could be protected. Moral cosmopolitanism maintains that each human being, irrespective of nationality and citizenship, has the same basic rights. As Kant and Arendt already observed, there is an incongruity between human rights and citizen rights, and the UDHR implicitly presupposes global institutions above nation-states with the mandate to enforce human rights when necessary. Benhabib argues for a right to membership that goes beyond national borders. Global principles of justice would imply liberal and humanitarian refugee and immigration laws. Both points of departure require more powerful global institutions that can enforce the laws. Only then will the human rights proclaimed in Articles 13 and 14 of the UDHR correspond to enforceable political obligations.

#### **References**

- Amnesty International. 2010. 'Refugees and Migrants', www.amnesty.org/en/refugeesand-migrants (accessed 3 January 2013)
- Arendt, H. 1951. *The Origins of Totalitarianism*, New York: Harcourt
- Beitz, C. 1979. *Political Theory and International Relations*. Princeton University Press
- 1999. 'International Liberalism and Distributive Justice: A Survey of Recent Thought', *World Politics* 51: 269
- Benhabib, S. 2004. *The Rights of Others, Aliens, Residents and Citizens*. Cambridge University Press
- Brock, G. 2009. *Global Justice: A Cosmopolitan Account*. Oxford University Press
- Carens, J. 1987. 'Aliens and Citizens: The Case for Open Borders', *Review of Politics* 49: 251–73
	- 2003. 'Who Should Get In? The Ethics of Immigration Admissions', *Ethics and International Affairs* 17: 95–110
- Collste, G. 2002. *Is Human Life Special? Religious and Philosophical Perspectives on the Principle of Human Dignity*. Bern, New York: Peter Lang
- Gibney, M. 2004. *Ethics and Politics of Asylum: Liberal Democracy Response to Refugees*. Cambridge University Press
- Heuser, S. 2008. 'Is There a Right to Have Rights? The Case of the Right of Asylum', *Ethical Theory and Moral Practice* 11: 3–13
- International Organization for Migration. 2010. 'Global Estimates and Trends', www.iom.int/jahia/Jahia/about-migration/facts-and-figures/lang/en (accessed 17 August 2010)
- Kant, I. 1983. 'Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals', in *Ethical Philosophy*, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett

1992. *Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Essay*. Bristol: Thoemmes Press

- Loescher, G. 1999. 'Refugees: A Global Human Rights AND Security Crisis', in T. Dunne and N. Wheeler (eds.). *Human Rights in Global Politics*. Cambridge University Press
- Miller, D. 2005. 'Immigration: The Case for Limits', in A. Cohen and C. Wellman (eds.), *Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics*, Malden, MA: Blackwell
- Pogge, T. 1989. *Realizing Rawls*, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press
- Rawls, J. 1999. *The Law of Peoples*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Scheffler, S. 2007. 'Immigration and the Significance of Culture', *Philosophy and Public Affairs* 35: 93–125
- Shacknove, A. E. 1984. 'Who Is a Refugee?', *Ethics* 95: 274–84
- Stop Rape Now. 2010. 'Stop Rape Now: UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict', www.stoprapenow.org (accessed 17 August 2010)
- Tan, K. 2004. *Justice Without Borders*. Cambridge University Press
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Division of Programme Support and Management. 2013. '2011 Global Trends', www.unhcr.org/4fd6f87f9.html (accessed 25 November 2013)
- United Nations Population Division. 2010. 'International Migrant Stock: 2008 Revision', http://esa.un.org/migration (accessed 25 November 2013)
- Walzer, M. 1983. *Spheres of Justice: A Defense of Pluralism and Equality*. New York: Basic Books

**Part VI** Contexts of justice