### Dignity in traditional Chinese Daoism 

QIAO QING-JU

'Dignity' (--, zun¯ yan) ´ is, in the contemporary Chinese language, both a foreignism and a native term. As a foreignism, many scholars conceive the main function of dignity to be the communication of modern European ideas of human dignity, especially that of Kantian philosophy, to contemporary China which is thought to lack such ideas. Thus, in the *Ci-Hai* (--, literally a 'sea of terms'), one of the few comprehensive Chinese dictionaries, the second definition of this word is: 'The recognition and affirmation of the moral and social value of an individual or a social organization; The acknowledgment of the value of human life as the most fundamental dignity of human beings' (Ci-Hai 2000: 2300). The *Ci-Hai* mentions nothing of the Chinese tradition of the concept, as if it does not play a role in Chinese philosophy. This would be a misunderstanding: a notion of dignity is central in both Confucianism and Daoism. The Confucian concept of dignity is similar to the one we find in Kantian philosophy: dignity is understood as *human* dignity and strongly related to *action*. In the Daoist tradition, 'dignity' functions very differently, but this does not mean, I will suggest, that it is of no interest to our understanding of the concept. Quite the contrary: the Daoist conception of dignity could contribute to the global discussion of the concept precisely because it offers a different perspective.

I will first briefly attempt to outline the general features of the idea of Dao, and second discuss the substance and role of dignity in Daoism.

#### **Dignity in Daoism**

In Daoism, the two most important concepts are Dao (-, the way), the concept after which the school is named, and De (-), a term referring to where Dao or part of it dwells. Literally, Dao refers to the way one takes to a destination. There is a certain necessity about the concept of the way: it is not an arbitrarily chosen path in the sense that one could have chosen another and reach the same destination, the way is rather the principle that guides one's movements. The way is, in the *Lao-zi*, not merely the way of the human being, but also that of everything else in the world. It embraces the ongoing process of the whole universe: it is the highest principle to be followed, even for Heaven and Earth. One could wonder whether, like every other way, the Dao also has a startingpoint. Being the highest principle, it is impossible that anything existed prior to the Dao; there would either be no principle upon which such an existence could be founded, or something would have to exist outside Dao – both cases contradict the concept of Dao as the highest principle. Nor is it possible to say that in the beginning there existed a void wherein the Dao dwelled, or that there exists a ceaseless flow of time in which the Dao moves; such imaginations too contradict the concept of Dao. Since at the beginning there is only the Dao, it must follow that Dao is the beginning itself: it is the Dao that produces everything. In the words of *Lao-zi*: 'Dao produced the One. The One produced the two. The two produced the three. And the three produced the ten thousand things' (Chan 1973: 160). Thus, as it was the Dao that produced everything, it cannot be only a principle: it needs to hold a material component; something immaterial cannot bring forth something material. The *Lao-zi*states that Dao is constituted by form and essence, and says 'there was something undifferentiated and yet complete' – in short Dao is made up of both material and spiritual elements.

The Dao, it is said in the *Lao-zi*, also 'clothes and breeds' everything: 'The Great Dao flows everywhere. It may go left or right. All things depend on it for life, and it does not turn away from them' (Chan 1973: 157). Dao's clothing and breeding refers to the idea of bringing things forth and letting things develop as they are, without interference; the Dao has no desire of its own, it is not a principle that dominates or forces things. The characteristic of the principle of Dao is described as 'self-so', 'self-ness' or the 'as-it-is-ness' that is essential to all that is. Nature is self-so: it develops self-determinately, not guided by power from without but naturally. This holds for everything: for rivers, trees, cats and human beings – everything is brought forth and developed by Dao is a forceless, self-so way; 'Man models himself after Earth. Earth models itself after Heaven. Heaven models itself after Dao. And Dao models itself after the self-so' (Chan 1973: 153, with my revision).

The part of Dao obtained by a thing is called 'De': De is the 'dwelling place of Dao' (Li 2002: 770), the presence of Dao in individual things. Accordingly, things – human beings included – are actually and directly guided by De.

Having briefly sketched an outline of the Daoist framework, let me now turn to the concept of dignity. Daoism proclaims that, ultimately, only Dao is dignified: things have dignity only insofar as De is present in them. Dignity is described in the *Lao-zi* in terms of respectability and nobility: 'the myriad things respect the Dao and honour De. The respectability of Dao and the nobility of De emerge naturally without anyone's command' (Chen 1984: 261). Since Dao is the source of dignity, the question regarding whether a human being is dignified is intimately related to that person's relation to Dao: dignity is possessed by those who pursue Dao and embody it in themselves – 'He who pursues the Dao is identified with the Dao' (Chan 1973: 151–2). The *Lao-zi* further demands that one should accumulate De. Accordingly, to ask what it means to have dignity is the same thing as asking what it means to have accumulated De. How, then, does one accumulate De, and what is the state of a person who has successfully done so?

First, the *Lao-zi* offers a method of 'valuing or appreciating one's own body', which means not to indulge oneself in the enjoyment of worldly pleasure, but to be content with a minimum of material goods. 'The five colours cause one's eyes to be blind. The five tones cause one's ears to be deaf. The five flavours cause one's palate to be spoiled' (Chan 1973: 161). One should ultimately, in order to embody De, attempt to diminish one's desire for worldly pleasure, material goods and even fame. The *Lao-zi* asks: 'Which is more intimate to one, fame or one's body?' (*ibid*.). No doubt the answer should be the latter. Also knowledge should be abandoned: 'Abandon sageliness and discard wisdom; Then the people will benefit a hundredfold. Abandon humanity and discard righteousness; Then the people will return to filial piety and deep love. Abandon skill and discard profit; Then there will be no thieves or robbers' (*ibid*.: 149).

Second, the *Lao-zi* states that one should not compete with others but rather strive to act in their benefit: 'The best (man) is like water. Water is good; it benefits all things and does not compete with them . . . It is because he does not compete that he is without reproach' (Chan 1973: 143). And: 'It is precisely because he does not compete that the world cannot compete with him' (*ibid*.: 151). According to the *Lao-zi*, not competing is not only a kind of De, but also the heavenly Dao; furthermore, it proposes a way to win: 'The Way of Heaven does not compete, and yet it skilfully achieves victory' (*ibid*.: 173). In other words, persons who are good, respectable and noble are those who do not strive to excel by contrasting themselves with others, but rather those that strive to be in harmony with their environment.

The perceptive reader may have noticed that the path to dignity taught by the *Lao-zi* is one of negative or passive virtue: it is the path of abstinence rather than the path of action. Daoism proposes a perspective wherein dignified action is understood passively: if we would understand it in terms of movement, the path Daoism proposes is one of reversion rather than extension. The best way to live is not to continuously strive for more possessions, more power, but to reduce one's desires so that he is least in conflict with his environment. The best kind of action, then, is 'non-action': action that is not grounded in a desire for worldly things nor competition, action that is not even motivated by knowledge or ethical precepts – non-action is action that is completely natural, like the river that follows its course. 'The pursuit of Tao is to diminish day after day. It is to diminish and further diminish until one reaches the point of taking no action. No action is undertaken, and yet nothing is left undone' (Chan 1973: 162). Thus, being dignified means having identified oneself with Dao: a state in which one is not troubled by profane desires but in harmony with the world. Becoming dignified, however, is not a path of intentional action: one should refrain from goal-oriented action, and rather attempt to act naturally – to 'let action happen', as it were.

#### **The relevance of the Daoist conception of dignity**

The Daoist conception of dignity is very different from the Kantian understanding and also from the Confucian point of view. I will here emphasize two essential differences and elaborate on the potentially positive political import the Daoist perspective can be taken to have.

First, Daoism entails a kind of non-anthropocentrism: it does not restrict the ascription of dignity to human beings. As said above, Dao is the source of dignity but also the ground of all that exists; everything thus possesses dignity. 'There is not a single thing without the Dao', it even exists in 'excrement and urine' (Chan 1973: 203). This might at first sight seem in tension with what was said before – that one may attempt to accumulate De and thus become more dignified: if one can become more dignified, there seem to exist gradations of dignity, which seems to conflict with the idea that everything has dignity. But this, from the perspective of Dao, would not be correct: the idea that there is not a single thing without Dao should not be taken to lead to the conclusion that everything is in an ethically relevant sense equal, but rather that everything is *unique*: everything that exists possesses unique value. For instance, if a man sleeps in a damp place, he will have a pain in his loin; but an eel will surely not. If a man lives in the top of a tree, he will be frightened and tremble, but a monkey will surely not. 'Of these three who knows the right way of habitation?' (Fung 1952: 230). Accordingly, the *Zhuang-zi* claims: 'From the standpoint of Dao, there is nothing which is valuable or worthless, whereas from the point of view of things, each holds itself as something valuable and other things as of no account' (Fung 1952: 234, with my revision). The *Zhuang-zi's* conclusion is: 'From the point of view of Dao, what is noble and what is humble? They all merge into one' (Chan 1973: 206).

Second, the path to dignity – the accumulation of De – is a path of negative virtue or non-action. This contrasts with Kantianism and Confucianism in the sense that the latter two could be conceived as prescribing positive virtues or the preconditions of the development of these. The essence of the difference lies therein that from a Daoist perspective, it is impossible to articulate positively the path to dignity: what it means to be identified with Dao is not something that can be taught. The *Lao-zi* states: 'I take no action and the people of themselves are transformed. I love tranquillity and the people of themselves become correct. I engage in no activity and the people of themselves become prosperous' (Chan 1973: 166–7). So, unlike the Kantian perspective from which it is possible to articulate standards that may evaluate whether an action is in concord with dignity and the Confucian position in which virtues may be distinguished that determine whether one is dignified or not, the Daoist viewpoint on dignity entails that it is necessarily left to individuals to become one with Dao – one person's action cannot inspire another to non-action.

These two points on which the Daoist perspective differs from Kantian and Confucian give us interesting material to reflect upon in attempting to conceive a global notion of dignity. From a Daoist viewpoint, animals and nature are ethically relevant: like human beings, they possess unique value because they all have their ground in Dao. In political debates on ecology, Daoism thus could provide an interesting source for claiming that we should adopt a respectful attitude towards non-human forms of existence in a sense that Kantian doctrines do not easily seem capable of doing. Also, the ineffability of what it means to live a dignified life has some interesting consequences in reflecting upon the relation between state and individual: it gives rise to the thought that governmental policy has its limits. The government should be careful to interfere in citizens' lives: excessive interventions will lead to imbalance or even disorder in the individual state of being, and potentially infringe upon his path to dignity. This provides food for thought in thinking the relationship between dignity and rights: from a Daoist perspective, it is not self-evident that all policies aimed to protect human rights in fact protect that on which human rights are often thought to be based.

Daoism is a perspective that is very different from Kantian and Confucian approaches, and I hope to have explained that this does not mean it could not have relevance for the global discussion on dignity: it rather gives us material to reflect upon, and in that quality perhaps helps us to better understand the concept.

#### **References**

- Baird Callicott, J., and Ames, R. T. (eds.). 1989. *Nature in Asian Traditions of Thought: Essays in Environmental Philosophy*. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press
Chan, Wing-tsit. 1973. *A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy*. Princeton University Press

- Chen, Gu-ying. 1984. *Annotation and Translation of the Lao-zi with Comments*. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- *Ci-Hai* (--). 2002. Shanghai: Shanghai Dictionary Press
- De Bery, Theodore W, and Tu, Wei-ming (eds.). 1998. *Confucianism and Human Rights*. New York: Columbia University Press
- Fung, Yu-lan.1952.*A History of Chinese Philosophy*, trans. D. Bodde. Princeton University Press
- Li, Jing-de. 1986. *Classified Conversations of Zhu Xi*(----), Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Li, Xiang-feng. 2002. *Collations and Annotations of Guan-zi* (----). Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Mou, Zong-san. 1985. *On the Highest Good*. Taipei: Student Book Company
- Reihman, G. 2006. 'Categorically Denied: Kant's Criticism of Chinese Philosophy', *Journal of Chinese Philosophy* 33: 51–65
- Ruan, Yuan (ed.). 1980. *Commentaries and Subcommentaries to the Thirteen Classics*. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Su, Yu. 1992. *Justifications of the Meanings of Luxuriant Gem of the Spring and Autumn Annals* (----). Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Wang, Xian-qian. 1988. *A Collection of Explanations of the Xun-zi* (----). Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Wang, Xiao-yu. 1988. *A Collection of Cheng Brothers' Works*(--). Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Zhu, Xi. 1986. *A Collection of Comments on Four Books* (----). Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company

**Part III** Systematic conceptualization