### Buddhism: inner dignity and absolute altruism

JENS BRAARVIG

In Buddhism, as in the Hindu tradition, the concept of dignity appears in different and paradoxical qualities. As in Hinduism, in Buddhism there exists a tension between dignity which is inherent to all living beings and socially embedded dignity which appears in different gradations. In this chapter, I will focus primarily on dignity in classical and Mahay¯ ana ¯ Buddhism.1

'Since beginning-less time' man is imprisoned in the round of rebirth, and whether he is born as an animal, spirit, human in a high or low class, in hell or even as a divine being, is entirely dependent on *karma*: action understood as a cause which explains a being's (way of) existence. This is reflected in the idea that the individual is completely responsible for his own existence: what one is depends wholly on one's previous actions – in this life and the ones preceding it. Indeed, in Buddhism we find a type of radical individualism: one's (well)being and fate is in a very fundamental sense an individual affair. This is a basic premise shared by nearly all Indian philosophical and religious traditions, but where Buddhism differs from the others is that it understands existence to be characterized by impermanence and emptiness – everything perishes the moment it comes into existence. This also means that there is in the strict sense no such thing as 'the self': beings, like all other things, *lack essence*. Insight in the nature of existence, combined with concentrational and meditative practices, may allow the individual to realize the end of his own suffering/disquietude: the end of further rebirth, the extinction of the self in *nirv¯an. a*. Thus, in Buddhism, the individual is absolutely responsible for his own existence: his past actions are the cause of his direction towards good or bad or towards the final freedom one may seek by adopting a monk's life and isolating himself from society – solely focused on his individual salvation.

<sup>1</sup> For a general introduction to Buddhism with a representative bibliography, see Freiberger and Kleine 2011. What we call Classical Buddhism corresponds roughly to *Theravada*, the Buddhism of southern Asia today. *Mah¯ay¯ana* Buddhism is in recent centuries and today present in the countries of northern Asia.

#### **Classical Buddhism**

The anthropology of classical Buddhism is characterized by its ascribing to each human being an existential freedom or autonomy: every human, male or female, is at liberty to find salvation from the circle of eternal rebirth. As already suggested, this is conceptualized in a radically individualistic fashion: salvation wholly lacks a social connotation, but is rather described in psychological terms – as processes of perception, reflection etc. – which are all done away with in reaching *nirv¯an. a*, the absence of disquietude. Although in a strict sense there exists no 'self', one could say that in classical Buddhism nonetheless we find a notion of dignity grounded precisely in the freedom of individuals to liberate themselves from the suffering which the circle of eternal rebirth causes them. However, this philosophical notion of dignity was not reflected as social/moral dignity: persons did not hold individual rights. This is not very surprising; the idea that happiness – absence of suffering – lies *beyond* the eternal process of reincarnation gives Buddhism a flare of unworldliness; or rather, it explicitly states that worldly matters should be shunned. In fact, part of the monastic code (the *Vinaya*) is the issue that monks should not engage in politics or economics; they should focus on the search for freedom *from* – not in – this world. We could say that Buddhist ideology is non-social: it has no interests in law and political power. The codes of conduct which follow from the tradition are rules which specify actions that would produce bad *karma*; they are not in any way motivated by a drive to protect the individual in the realm of social and political practices. Codes of conduct exist for the sake of the individual: they are aimed at preventing *him* from producing bad *karma*, and are not inspired by ideals of social justice.

This does not mean that the notion of dignity is in no way reflected in the social realm. If we take a closer look at the term '*arhat*' – the Buddhist counterpart of 'dignified' which the word directly denotes – we notice that it could not be applied to everybody: the status of '*arahts*' was reserved to persons who practiced Buddha's teachings on insight and meditation, to those who would reach *nirv¯an. a* upon death. Indeed, the word is perhaps best translated as 'Saint'; the *arhats* were usually depicted in Buddhist iconography as Buddha's five hundred closest disciples. Thus, dignity as *arhat* was applicable only to monks and formed an unattainable ideal for laymen. Naturally, this inequality *qua* religious status translated to a form of social inequality: the monastic community was also socially superior to the lay community. So in classical Buddhism 'dignity' was a concept that was not universally attributed to all individuals equally, but only to the monastic elite.

According to Buddhist views, the world of phenomena is essentially impermanent: open for change, transformation – unreliable. The same holds for us: we lack a self, a constant, we are ultimately self-less, *an¯atman*, and our grossest misunderstanding is to cling to an illusory self. Combined, these ontological concepts form the ground for the Four Noble Truths. The first states that life is suffering, *duh. kha*: our existence is impermanent, sometimes we are happy but happiness always perishes – living beings are in a 'state' of disquietude. The second says that the cause of this suffering (*samudaya*) is craving, desire; the third that there exists a way out (*nirv¯an. a*) of this suffering; the fourth specifies the 'eightfold path' (*as. t .a˙¯ngam¯arga*) by which this cessation may be achieved. This path consists of prescripts regarding knowledge, ethics and practices of concentration and mindfulness. This impermanence, and 'floating state of things', may well open up for a lack of legal protection for, *in case*, human rights, as dignity is seen as very much dependent on the individual, who is always a product of his own actions (*karma*) since 'beginning-less time' and thus completely and solely responsible for what he is. But, by the practice of the Buddhas teachings, he can attain the status of an *arhat*, sainthood, or rather *dignity*, and reach *nirv¯an. a* at death. We can say, then, that classical Buddhism teaches *inner* dignity, that can be attained by religious practice, but it is not an *inherent* dignity. This kind of dignity, though, we would argue can be found in Mahay¯ ana ¯ Buddhism.

#### **Mahay¯ ana ¯ Buddhism**

The religious ideal of classical Buddhism did not remain without opposition: the so-called 'Mahay¯ ana Buddhism' paved the way for a more egalitarian conception ¯ of dignity. In parts of Mahay¯ ana Buddhism, we find a view that attributes dignity ¯ to all living things equally: not only human beings, but also gods, animals, spirits and the inhabitants of Hell participate in the 'Buddha-nature' or the 'nature of the Awakened'.

Mahay¯ ana Buddhism, which had its origin around the beginning of Western ¯ chronology, was a reaction to what was conceived as the incomplete interpretation of Buddha's words. It thus was a critical and in some parts strongly rhetorical attack on its predecessor; it framed the position of classical Buddhism as *h¯ınay¯ana* – the 'small way' – and its own ethics as *mah¯ay¯ana* – the 'great way'. Mahay¯ ana Buddhism argued that its aim was to save all living beings rather ¯ than narrowly focus on personal liberation; the aim of Buddha's teachings is to commit oneself to save all other beings before oneself. This tradition thus propounded a radical ethical altruism and accentuated egalitarian ideology, and criticized the *arhat* as an illusion or social construct unconnected with spiritual maturity. The religious ideal thus moves away from the monk and the disciple striving to be an *arhat*, towards the ideal of *bodhisattva* – the person who has vowed to give all living beings happiness and spiritual maturity, and is reborn in every cycle of the universe to help those who suffer before thinking about himself. '*Bodhi*' means 'awakening' (the Buddha), '*sattva*' means 'living being': the *bodhisattva* is thus the person who has adopted the vow of awakening for the sake of all living beings. Instead of aiming to become an *arhat*, those following the teachings of Mahay¯ ana ¯ Buddhism thus aim to become a compassionate Buddha.

The ethics of Mahay¯ ana Buddhism has its ground in two ontological concepts: ¯ emptiness and impermanency. Although we perceive things as having essences, as separate objects distinct from us as subjects, in reality every 'thing' is empty: the subject–object distinction is an illusion, everything is void of substance. This also holds for Buddha; Buddha and all living beings are essentially the same. But obviously we do not perceive it as such: what we see is a *world* created by our own 'conceptual filter', a *fata morgana* or echo which hinders our true perception of the emptiness of reality. A world of phenomena which are essentially impermanent: open for change, transformation – unreliable. The same holds for us: we lack a self, a constant, we are ultimately self-less, *an¯atman*, and our grossest misunderstanding is to cling to an illusory self. This view is shared with classical Buddhism, but the Mahay¯ ana view would ¯ add that *everything* is empty (*´s¯unya*), not only the idea of the *self*. On this ontological basis was built a new form of ethics, which was socially directed. Ethics are for the sake of transcending the illusory 'self and other dichotomy' by social virtue, as differing from the *H¯ınay¯ana*, which is criticized for being only interested in the personal salvation, and thus nothing but a more subtle form of self-seeking. In this way, the ethics of purity and meditation of classical Buddhism is transformed, and specified in a list of 'six perfections': generosity, morality, tolerance, vigour, meditation and insight into the true nature of reality, where the first four are typically social virtues. Thus, also compassion and respect for life become essential. As already mentioned, the task of the *bodhisattva* is not understood as an individual or personal affair: he should aim to cultivate the 'omnipresent Buddha-nature' in all living things by his great compassion and selflessness – thus he transcends the dichotomy of self and other by sharing the life with every living being. Obviously, this is quite a lofty ideal, since it simply cannot be reached: the altruism prescribed by this tradition of Buddhism extends so far that nobody will be able to live up to this standard. In contrast with classical Buddhism therefore, in Mahay¯ ana ¯ Buddhism we find a concept of dignity with social or moral substance: all living things possess dignity because they participate in the Buddha-essence, and as such should be respected in the sense that others have the duty to support them in striving to end suffering. In this way, all beings have an unborn Buddha within, the *tath¯agatagarbha*, a seed that can be developed into full buddhahood, and every being should be respected as a Buddha. Dignity thus appears as something which is to be equally ascribed to all, and commands that others respect the dignified person (or animal, god or spirit, etc.) in their actions. Indeed, in some of the texts, the exemplars are laymen – explicitly *not* members of the monastic class. In the *Ma˜nju´sr¯ıvikr¯ıd. ita* for instance, we read about a prostitute who, sharing in the dignity inherent in all, appears as a grand *bodhisattva*; setting forth the idea that all social roles are mere constructs, and that all personalities are essentially the same as *bodhi* – the awakening of the Buddha.

#### **Emperor Asoka ´**

These ideas are not merely philosophical: they have been practiced as political doctrines also, for instance under the rule of emperor Asoka. A ´ soka ruled over ´ much of what constitutes India today from 269 to 232 BC and is reckoned the military and political leader who created the first Indian empire.

Emperor Asoka, as we are told by the Buddhist legends, was incredibly evil ´ when he conquered his empire, but in his remorse became a devout Buddhist and piously committed himself to doing good. Asoka's inscriptions primarily ´ make the welfare of people and religious tolerance a political issue: he promoted rights and freedoms, especially freedom of religion. He appears to have done so on the basis of an egalitarian concept of dignity ascribed to humans and animals; *brahmin*, the poor, the chiefs, the soldiers and the elderly alike – no one should suffer harassment or humiliating treatment. In the inscriptions he left all over northern India he gives instructions on how his kingdom should be ruled by his officials.2

Truly, I consider the welfare of all to be my duty, and the root of this is exertion and the prompt despatch of business. There is no better work than promoting the welfare of all the people and whatever efforts I am making is to repay the debt I owe to all beings to assure their happiness in this life, and attain heaven in the next. (6r)

And indeed, Asoka ´ not only promoted religious freedom negatively; he made explicit that the existence of not one but several religions was a good; there are many ways to understand truth, and interaction between religions would only contribute positively:

Beloved-of-the-Gods, King Piyadasi, honors both ascetics and the householders of all religions, and he honors them with gifts and honors of various kinds. But Beloved-of-the-Gods, King Piyadasi, does not value gifts and honors as much as he values this – that there should be growth in the essentials of all religions. Growth in essentials can be done in different ways, but all of them have as their root restraint in speech, that is, not praising one's own religion, or condemning the religion of others without good cause. And if there is cause for criticism, it should be done in a mild way. But it is better to honor other religions for this reason. By so doing, one's own religion benefits, and so do other religions, while doing otherwise harms one's own religion and the religions of others. Whoever praises his own religion, due to excessive devotion, and condemns others with the thought 'Let me glorify my own religion', only harms his own religion. Therefore

2 The translations are based on those of Dhammika 1993, with some changes. All the quotations are from the Rock edicts (r). For a general treatment and complete bibliography, see Falk 2006.

contact (between religions) is good. One should listen to and respect the doctrines professed by others. Beloved-of-the-Gods, King Piyadasi, desires that all should be well-learned in the good doctrines of other religions. (12r)

#### **The Arthas´astra ¯**

We have chosen to treat the *Artha´s¯astra*3 under the heading of Buddhism as it is traditionally ascribed to Can¯ . akya Kaut. ilya ('the Crooked One'), who is supposed to be the minister of Candragupta, Asoka's grandfather. Parts of the ´ *Artha´s¯astra*were certainly composed somewhat later, probably at the start of the Common Era. Often Can¯ . akya has been called the 'Machiavelli of India', as he articulates advice and concrete suggestions on how a ruler could stay in power by any means necessary. The main task of the ruler is to be 'just with the rod' (in Sanskrit: *dan. d. a*, meaning 'authority' and 'strong rule'), in order to scare people and prevent them from disrupting the social order. So he should employ the rod; 'If not used it gives rise to the law of the fishes. For then the stronger swallows the weak in the absence of the wielder of the Rod. Protected by that, he prevails' (1.4.13–15). Lacking a religious foundation, the *Artha´s¯astra* is pragmatic in style and aimed at the protection of the stability of the state. As such, the focus seems less to lie on the individual and rather on the *collective*: rules and laws are not based on a type of moral respect each individual commands, but rather on the question whether they safeguard the stability within the collective. Indeed, punishments potentially include all kinds of cruelties – killing and cutting of limbs, for instance – and their severity is dependent on the class to which a person belongs. Thus, in the *Artha´s¯astra* we find no concept of dignity as something that is equally ascribed to each individual.

#### **Conclusion**

The concept of dignity appears in various forms in the Buddhist tradition. In classical Buddhism, dignity is a strongly individualistic notion and ascribed only to the *arhat*; only he will reach nirvan¯ . a – the absence of disquietude – after death. In Mahay¯ ana Buddhism, precisely this individualism and elitism is ¯ criticized: the ideal is no longer the *arhat* but the *bodhisattva*, he (or she) who manifests radical altruism in the quality of attempting to liberate the suffering of all others before thinking about oneself. In this form of Buddhism, dignity becomes an egalitarian moral notion: it is ascribed to all humans (although obviously not only to humans) and leads to a duty in others. That these are not merely philosophical concepts is shown by the example of emperor Asoka, who ´ tried to effectuate an egalitarian notion of dignity through political precepts – of which freedom of religion is perhaps the most prominent. But that social conditions do not necessarily reflect philosophical and religious ideas, is shown

3 1965. trans., ed. and commented, R. P. Kangle, vols. 1–3, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. by the *Artha´s¯astra*: the collective; the stability of the state became central and the individual was not in a moral sense relevant – let alone inherently dignified. So all in all we can say that dignity appears in the Buddhist tradition in many interesting but fundamentally different ways.

Buddhism, with its lofty ideals, has diffused East Asian societies throughout millennia, and rulers have supported Buddhism with surely many kinds of motivations. The Buddhist monastic communities, with their formalized rules for conduct, being the backbone and basis of the historical continuity of Buddhism, do not seem to have had much formal influence on general law-making that would implement the Buddhist ideals of tolerance, compassion, respect and peace, and to protect the dignity embedded in them. Thus, it remains always dependent on the historical context to what extent Buddhist ideals were important for the societies at large, or only for elitist groups. However, the ideals, as described above, are shared by Buddhists on the whole, even though what we have termed 'classical Buddhism', at least in the last five hundred years, have dominated the South Asian countries, such as Thailand, Burma and Sri Lanka; and the Mahay¯ ana has been influential in China, Tibet, Japan, Vietnam, Korea., ¯ etc., since the introduction of Buddhism to these countries after the beginning of the Common Era.

#### **References**

- *Artha´s¯astra*. 1965. trans., ed. and commented, R. P. Kangle, vols. 1–3. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
- Dhammika, Ven. S. 1993. *Edicts of King Asoka*. Kandy: Wheel
- Falk, H. 2006. *A´sokan Sites and Artefacts: A Sourcebook with Bibliography*. Mainz am Rhein: von Zabern
- Freiberger, O., and Kleine, C. 2011. *Buddhismus: Handbuch und kritische Einf¨uhrung*. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht ¨