### The place of dignity in the Indian Constitution

UPENDRA BAXI

While the makers of the Indian Constitution rather acutely anticipated the notion of 'human dignity as empowerment' (Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001), it is no simple task to understand the precise place of human dignity within the constitutional scheme. Moreover, for a variety of reasons, grasping the ways in which dignity as empowerment has been put to work in the sixty-plus years of the Indian Constitution remains an even more hazardous narrative.

First, India's sixty-year-long freedom struggle was premised on the idea that sustained colonial predation and subjugation constituted an epic saga of humiliation – the Other of dignity. This Indian struggle for freedom, together with the Constitution that it eventually produced, offers a becoming and befitting response to the contemporary and ahistoric 'digcrits' discourse (questioning the conceptual and normative coherence of human dignity as well as its institutional viability).

Second, the freedom movement also generates a new *telos* of dignity for the subjects of violent social exclusion constituted by the discursive formations of the Hindu *Dharma* that disacknowledged moral capacity and legal subjectivity to India's millennially humiliated peoples – the Untouchables, the indigenous peoples, and in a related yet distinct sense the masses of Indian women.

Third, the Indian Constitution composes its own idea of dignity at the very moment of the enunciation of the value of dignity by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) – an elementary global social fact often unacknowledged.

Fourth, the Indian Constitution's conceptions of dignity, far from being mimetic of Euro-American incarnations of the idea, offer points of departure for 'the global South'. While it may be too much to say that dignity by and in itself furnishes the leitmotif of the Indian freedom struggle, it is abundantly clear that it at least inspired many conceptions of dignity, as displayed in contrasts between the thinking of two founders, Mohandas Gandhi and Bhim Rao Ambedkar (Baxi 1994).

#### **The place of dignity in the Indian Constitution**

Dignity is the last of the four values enunciated by the Preamble to the Indian Constitution. After 'Justice, social, economic, and political', 'Liberty, of thought, expression, belief, and worship' and 'Equality, of status and of opportunity', we read 'Fraternity, assuring the dignity of the individual'. Subject to two exceptions, the Indian Constitution (with a hundred amendments) does not further elucidate this sense of dignity as a subset of the virtue or value of 'fraternity'.

The first exception is the forty-second amendment, added after the Emergency period of 1975–6. Here, the Preamble's reference to fraternity is amended by adding the phrase 'the unity and integrity of the Nation', as if to suggest that the practices of fraternity or of dignity may erode this! The second exception, one that is more amenable to the combination of fraternity and dignity, is to be found in the insertion by the same amendment of Part IV-A, entitled 'the fundamental duties' of citizens. Clause (e) speaks of the duty to 'promote harmony and common brotherhood' beyond 'religious, linguistic, and regional or sectional diversities' and in particular 'to renounce practices derogatory of women'; clause (f) speaks to the duty to 'value and to preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture'; clause (g) outlines duties of environmental preservation and of 'compassion for all living creatures'. This extraordinary elaboration of fraternity values has not remained merely hortatory because the duties in Part IV-A impose constitutional obligations on all citizens, including legislators and justices. On the basis of this, the Supreme Court of India has been able to legislate a binding law against sexual harassment in workplaces,1 and its environmental jurisprudence draws extensively on Part IV-A duties, which also increasingly catalyze performances of legislative activism. I pursue this in what follows, but only through the question whether it may be the case that fraternity values are more apt for a language of obligations whereas dignity values remain more suited to the language of rights.

Even so, it may seem at first sight that the combination of fraternity and dignity constitutes merely an appendage to the preceding three values; further, and in the abstract, it may be thought that these three value enunciations already crystallize the core dignitarian interests. Leading treatises on constitutional law almost eliminate from view the importance of the combination of fraternity and dignity, and much the same may be said concerning a handful of judicial autobiographies (Reddy 2008 being a notable exception). And it is only with the beginnings of radical post-1975–6 Emergency judicial activism in the 1980s (for example, Baxi 1980; 2001; 2010; Fredman 2008; Sathe 2001; and Sankar 2009) that constitutional adjudication becomes oriented to the fuller development of fraternity–dignity values.

1 *Vishakha* v. *State of Rajasthan*, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 3011.

#### **Dignity and fundamental rights**

Yet, in many a sense, the writing of Part III of the Indian Constitution (Fundamental Rights) elaborates the sense of fraternity as dignity. The right to equality is also a right against caste-based discrimination, extending beyond the state to civil society actors, networks and institutions. Article 15 forbids discrimination that enunciates statuses of indignity, in particular the caste-based ones; equally, Article 15(2) forbids caste-based discrimination limiting or denying access to 'shops, public restaurants, hotels, and places of public entertainment' and to 'the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly, or partly, out of state funds or dedicated to the use of general public'. The Indian constitutional combination of fraternity and dignity wages a war against the indignity of caste-based apartheid via a manifold and multiplex constitutional authorization of programmes of affirmative action enabling access to the rights to literacy and education, public services, and even legislative representation (Baxi 1984; Galanter 1984). Further, the provision for freedom of conscience and religion (Article 25) is constitutionally qualified by the dignityaffirming basic human rights of all citizens – especially by the 'throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus', which is further elaborated as inclusive of 'persons professing Sikh, Jaina, or Buddhist religion'.

The capping stone of the combination of fraternity and dignity is Article 17, which insists that 'Untouchability' is 'abolished', its practice is 'forbidden' and the 'enforcement of any disability on the ground of untouchability shall be an offence punishable in accordance with the law'. Further, Article 35 (suspending the federal design and detail) obliges as well as empowers Parliament to enact such offences. As far as I know, no constitutional arrangement has gone as far in enacting a code of constitutional criminal law in the processes of enunciating basic human rights. The Untouchability Offences Act, later replaced by the Civil Rights Act, proscribes practices of humiliation that are ritually sanctioned or socially tolerated. Further, the remarkable Prevention of Atrocities Act makes such practices of exclusion and violence against ex-untouchables and also indigenous peoples (named Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, respectively) offences of strict as well as group liability. A constitutional authority – the Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes – is fully empowered to take action against existent as well as potential constitutional transgressions. Even as the well-stated dichotomy between the law-in-the-books and the law-in-action persists, at times fiercely (Rao 2009; Baxi, P. 2011), the overall pro-dignity profiles of the normative and institutional apparatus present a remarkable ensemble. Further, it also remains true that new social identities and solidarities, movements and struggles, today articulate new meanings and priorities for the combination of fraternity and dignity.

#### **Dignity: specific emergences**

During nearly two-and-a-half decades of Indian constitutionalism, dignitarian interests and considerations featured rarely in the jurisprudence of Part III fundamental rights to equality – except of course in cases involving challenges to laws implementing Article 17. In these exceptional cases, the Supreme Court employed the idiom of the dignitary rights of historically vulnerable communities, as well as advancing an early judicial articulation of the right to privacy as an element of the rights to life and liberty.2 Further, the 1973 *Kesavananda Bharathi* doctrine of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution, which identified a number of essential features that may not be amended, named 'dignity' as one such feature.

In the space available, I can only highlight the extraordinary resurgence of the idea of dignity as an integral part of the rights to life and liberty of Article 21. Even as I narrate this briefly, three caveats are necessary. First, when presented with, *inter alia*, dignity-based challenges to capital punishment, the Supreme Court sustains the constitutionality of the challenged laws even though it limits them to the 'rarest of rare cases'. Second, the Supreme Court does not regard the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act as a violation of the dignity of foetal life forms, although it reinforces laws and policies directed against female feticide, and not necessarily in terms of any dignity-based discourse. Quite how this stands alongside judicial recourse to *Roe* v. *Wade* in the development of privacy as a component right of dignity concerning same-sex sexual orientation and conduct,3 and even the physician-assisted termination of human life,4 is unclear. Third, the distinct range of bioethical concerns with dignity has yet to arrive at the doorstep, or even the backstage, of Indian constitutional adjudication.

That being said, an extraordinary adjudicatory rewriting of Article 21 by *Maneka Gandhi*5 makes possible a full-fledged discourse of dignity rights. The authors of the Indian Constitution considered and specifically rejected the ideology of the 'due process of law' and instead provided that the state shall not deprive any person of his or her life or liberty without a procedure established by law; *Maneka* substitutes this with the phrase 'due process of law' (Chandrachud 2011).

Broadly speaking, judicial engagement with Article 21 now focuses on the constitutional meaning of life. A paradigm shift occurs with Justice Bhagwati's insistence in *Mullin* that:

the right to life includes the right to live with human dignity and all that goes along with it, namely, the bare necessaries of life such as adequate nutrition,

- 2 *Gobind* v. *State of Madhya Pradesh*, AIR 1975 SC 1378.
- 3 *Naz Foundation* v. *Government of New Capital Territory of Delhi*, 160 *Delhi Law Times* (2009) 277.
- 4 *Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug* v. *Union of India*, AIR 2011 SCI 1290.
- 5 *Maneka Gandhi* v. *Union of India*, AIR 1978 SC 597.

clothing and shelter and facilities for reading, writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms, freely moving about and mixing and commingling with fellow human beings. Every act which offends against or impairs human dignity would constitute deprivation *pro tanto* of this right to live and it would have to be in accordance with reasonable, fair and just procedure established by law which stands the test of other fundamental rights.6

This 'jurisgenerative' articulation opens up all forms of state action and conduct to full deliberative adjudicative scrutiny and in this way also marks a paradigm shift towards a near-'sovereign' role for constitutional judicial review. Initially occurring in the contexts of institutional practices of punitive as well as preventive detention, this articulation invigilates against and at times invalidates, restricts or forcefully disapproves of many a normative prescription and institutional practice – such as solitary confinement, denial of basic rights of persons in incarceration or preventive detention, handcuffing and prison irons, torture, cruel, degrading and inhumane punishment or treatment – (to extend Justice Krishna Iyer's phrase) as 'barbarity hostile to our goal of *human dignity* and *social justice*'.7

Soon enough, this combination moves towards a jurisprudence of normative empowerment. Rights against exploitation (Articles 23 and 24) suddenly assume visages of dignitary rights: practices not just of bonded labour but labour below the statutory minimum wages and child labour stand judicially christened as un-free, slave-like labour violating the canon of dignified life. So do many forms of domination in closed institutions, such as institutions of psychiatric care and juvenile and women's remand homes. In this way, dignitary rights assume a new form of complex juridification making regimes of custodial institutional exploitation constitutionally illegitimate. Further, even in relatively less-closed institutions such as schools, corporeal chastisement remains judicially outlawed as a violation of 'dignified life'. Dignitarian interests find an expansive endorsement in the proliferating judicial decisions concerning HIV/AIDS-affected persons. The new judicial dispensation of dignity rights is impressive indeed, extending co-equally to state as well as non-state actors and frameworks.

The reach of 'dignified life' becomes even more extensive by way of advancement of the erstwhile non-judicially enforceable socio-economic rights lumped together in Part IV of the Indian Constitution under the rubric 'Directive Principles of State Policy'. The jurisprudence of normative empowerment flourishes rather luxuriantly under the innovative auspices of dignity rights. Affirming and celebrating human dignity under the canopy of Article 21 rights – for example, the rights to healthcare, housing and shelter, literacy and education – this jurisprudence leaves open the question whether or not in actual judicial

<sup>6</sup> *Francis Coralie Mullin* v. *Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and Others* (1981) 1 SCC 608, para. 8.

<sup>7</sup> *Sunil Batra (11)* v. *Delhi Administration*, 1980 SCR (2) 557 at 587 (emphasis added).

reasoning, rhetoric and result these decisions in fact and effect advance other primary considerations of equality or liberty rights.

#### **'Dignity-plus'**

Practices of activist constitutional interpretation, however, do not regard fraternity and dignity as free-wheeling or stand-alone virtues. With the Delhi Court's *Naz* decision,8 reading down section 377 of the Indian Penal Code to exclude acts of same-sex adult sexual intimacy conducted in private from the sanction of the criminal law, we arrive at a fuller understanding of 'dignity-plus' logics, paralogics and languages. Earlier, as already noted, this 'plus' was 'fraternity'. With *Naz*, the 'plus' is dignity as the privacy of intimate forms of life (Baxi, U. 2011). By elaborating dignity notions that speak to *identity as difference* as the core of 'dignity-plus' full human 'personhood' rights, *Naz* places dignitarian interests and rights far above the contingency of dominant social moralities and the 'virtues' of state paternalism.

All the more remarkable is the reasoning that animates the adjudicative protection of 'dignity-plus'. I have suggested elsewhere (Baxi, U. 2011) that what remains distinctive to *Naz* is the salience of the latter consideration, now vociferously challenged before the Supreme Court by assorted public interest petitioners claiming that it vitally infringes core religious beliefs and practices. However, the constitutional morality developed by *Naz* achieves no such result; this dignity-plus reasoning does not ordain the practise of same-sex relationships by peoples of faith. Rather, it allows them to continue to practise their faith; however, this practise of faith is now within a context of interpretive pluralism in reading scriptural canons. Put another way, dignity-plus reasoning suggests that, if the state and its laws may not go so far as to criminalize conduct running against the grain of constitutional morality, neither may the custodians of faith or keepers of tradition do so. Scholarly forecasts of what Justices may do from the High Bench remain fallible; even so, it would be astonishingly unworthy of the Supreme Court to overrun this specific element of the *Naz* judgment.

#### **A concluding remark**

The remarkable aspect of dignity is that it rises above the indictment of human rights as constructs of domination. In the Indian experience, the dignity-plus constitutional conversation ineluctably suggests that taking human rights seriously remains impossible without taking human and social suffering seriously.

<sup>8</sup> *Naz Foundation* v. *Government of New Capital Territory of Delhi and Others*, 160 *Delhi Law Times* (2009) 277.

Lata Mani, a leading cultural and feminist theorist, suggests that such a linkage entails three ideas:

First, that suffering leads to a loss of dignity; second, the absence of choice leads to suffering and indignity; and third, control over self and circumstance facilitates freedom from suffering and in so doing, preserves dignity. Deducible here is an ideal of mastery over self and context or at least, the ability to set limits on how one is impinged upon by social forces and more broadly, by the conditions of life. (Mani 2011: 24)

However, Mani questions whether it is not time now to restore 'dignity's autonomy from suffering' and to strive to 'liberate empathy from a near exclusive association with the understanding of suffering and open the door to a subtler notion of attunement', that may enable activist 'witness and designated sufferer' to 'meet and remake each other outside the constricting frames which structure present encounters' (Mani 2011: 25). If so, how may we further rethink the juridical idea of dignity beyond 'constraint' and 'empowerment'?

#### **References**

- Baxi, U. 1980. *The Indian Supreme Court and Politics*. Lucknow: The Eastern Book Co. 1984. 'Legislative Reservations for Social Justice', in R. B. Goldman and J. Williams (eds.), *From Independence to Statehood: Managing Ethnic Conflict in Five African and Indian States*. London: Pinter, 210–24
	- 1994. 'Justice as Emancipation: The Legacy of Babasaheb Ambedkar', in U. Baxi and B. Parekh (eds.), *Crisis and Change in Contemporary India*. New Delhi: Sage, 122–49
	- 2001. 'The Avatars of Judicial Activism: Explorations in the Geography of (In)Justice', in S. K. Verma and K. Kumar (eds.), *Fifty Years of the Supreme Court of India: Its Grasp and Reach*. Oxford University Press and Indian Law Institute, 156–209
	- 2010. 'The Justice of Human Rights in Indian Constitutionalism', in A. Singh and S. Mohapatra (eds.), *Indian Political Thought: A Reader*. London, New York: Routledge, Chapter 17
	- 2011. 'Dignity In and With Naz', in A. Narrain and A. Gupta (eds.), *Law Like Love: Queer Perspectives on Law*. Delhi: Yoda Press, 231–52
- Baxi, P. 2011. 'Rape as Atrocity: Notes on the Judicial Interpretation of the SC and ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989'. Paper presented at the Kate Hamburger College, Institute of Law as Culture, Bonn, 28 June 2011
- Beyleveld, D., and Brownsword, R. 2001. *Human Dignity in Bioethics and Biolaw*. Oxford University Press
- Chandrachud, A. 2011. *Due Process of Law*. Lucknow: The Eastern Book Company
- Fredman, S. 2008. *Human Rights Transformed: Positive Rights and Positive Duties*. Oxford University Press
- Galanter, M. 1984. *Competing Equalities: Law and the Backward Classes in India*. Oxford University Press
- Mani, L. 2011. 'Human Dignity and Suffering: Some Considerations', *Economic and Political Weekly* 46(36) (3 September 2011)
- Rao, A. 2009. *The Caste Question: Dalits and the Politics of Modern India*. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press
- Reddy, O. C. 2008. *The Indian Supreme Court: Summits and Shallows*. Oxford University Press
- Sankar, S. 2009. *Scaling Justice: India's Supreme Court, Anti-Terror Laws and Social Rights*. Oxford University Press
- Sathe, S. P. 2001. *Judicial Activism in India*. Oxford University Press

**Part V** Conflicts and violence