**Part IV** Legal implementation

BAS DE GAAY FORTMAN

#### **Two genealogies of human rights**

Human rights reflect a determined effort to protect the dignity of each and every human being against abuse of power through fundamental rights. Notably, in the global political idea of human rights that emerged after the Second World War, two genealogies converged: first, the fight for universal recognition and equal protection of the dignity of each and every human being; and, second, the struggle for inalienable fundamental rights as a way to protect citizens against abuse of power, in particular by their own sovereign (the state).

Strikingly, while the emergence of the basic rights idea as legal protection against abuse of power, particularly by one's own sovereign, may indeed be called a 'Western' history, the narrative of universal recognition and protection of human dignity could just as well be termed 'anti-Western' history in the sense that equal dignity had to be vindicated in *contravention* of Western ideas and powers. For instance, the idea of legal principles was already part of Roman law (*generalia iuris principia*). One of these referred to freedom as something of inestimable value (*libertas inaestimabilis res est*);1 yet the application of this principle excluded subjugated peoples in general and slaves in particular. In fact, the whole story of the realization of universal human dignity must be understood as an ongoing political struggle. Indeed, the struggles against colonization and conquest, and the historical efforts to fight racial and ethnic hierarchy, have shaped the idea of truly *universal* human rights (Gilroy 2009).

The two genealogies meet in Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR): 'All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.' This global political confession reflects the two grand principles that underlie these paired but distinct genealogies, one of a substantive and the other of a procedural nature: *universal human dignity* and *fundamental rights*. Human rights thus have their origin in two

<sup>1</sup> Paulus libro secundo ad e*dictum*, *Corpus iuris civilis*, De diversis regulis iuris antiqui, D. 50, 17, 106. See also 122: Gaius libro quinto ad e*dictum* provinciale: 'Libertas omnibus rebus favorabilior est'.

distinct principles, each of which gives rise to specific problems with regard to the realization of these rights. In what follows I will discuss both principles, and highlight fundamental problems related to these. I will show, first, that there is a tension between the notion of universal human dignity and basic rights views: human dignity qualifies and connects the three basic values of liberty, equality and solidarity. On the level of fundamental rights, however, these values are often compartmentalized, which endangers the protection of universal human dignity. Second, I will argue that the effective implementation of human rights is problematic: the responsibility of enforcing rights lies mostly with individual nation-states, and in many states the notion of a 'right' as a protection against power is relatively new or even not evidently compatible with the existing legal order.

#### **Equal dignity**

The first of the two overarching principles underlying human rights, universal human dignity, refers to the inherent worth of each and every human being, simply as an innate consequence of human existence whether or not an individual person is herself convinced of that (De Blois 1998).2 'Inherent' is, indeed, the adjective used in the Preamble to the UDHR, meaning that human dignity is a matter of being rather than having, and hence implying that it cannot be taken away. In fact, as argued by United States Supreme Court Justice, William Brennan (1974, quoted in Wermiel 1998: 232), 'even the vilest criminal remains a human being possessed of common human dignity'.3 Yet, although inalienable, human dignity can be violated, by the individual himself, as well as by others.

Human dignity is seen then, as the core value sustaining human rights to which three basic values relate: liberty, equality and solidarity ('brotherhood'). First, human dignity qualifies all three basic human rights values – liberty, equality and solidarity – with the adjective 'all'. Second, it connects the three values behind distinct human rights. Hence, it would be a mistake to see one specific right – freedom of expression, for example – as just linked to one value, such as liberty in this case. Equality requires in this respect that the environment in which press freedom is being exercised should be conducive to free speech for everyone, while solidarity means that such freedom is not absolute in the sense of a right disconnected from the community in which it is being enjoyed. Human dignity, in any case, is the core value against which the exercise of any human right must be tested.

Implications of human dignity tend to be primarily approached from a negative angle. Thus, Ronald Dworkin has argued that the idea of human

- 2 For a full discussion of human dignity as a core principle in human rights, see Klein Goldewijk and De Gaay Fortman 1999.
- 3 Not surprisingly, Justice Brennan (1990, quoted in Wermiel 1998: 233) saw the death penalty as 'wholly inconsistent with the constitutional principle of human dignity'.

dignity 'supposes that there are ways of treating a man that are inconsistent with recognizing him as a full member of the human community, and holds that such treatment is profoundly unjust' (Dworkin 1978: 198–9). In a similar vein, Avishai Margalit has focused his understanding of human dignity on its opposite, *humiliation*, which he relates to injury of self-respect: it is 'any sort of behaviour or condition that constitutes a sound reason for a person to consider his or her self-respect injured' (Margalit 1996: 9).

From an operational perspective, the public-political implications of human dignity as the core of a global 'faith' in human civilization, encompass more than good governance and the rule of law as exemplified by human rights. Notably, the idea of a universal declaration of human rights was based to a considerable extent on the thinking of the American wartime president Franklin Delano Roosevelt. His 'four freedoms' comprised freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear. These are naturally interrelated, not only within the global human rights mission, but also in close connection with two other major ventures: human security, as based on FDR's freedom from fear, and human development, as tuned towards his freedom from want.

Human development, from this perspective, means that life becomes more than a mere struggle to sustain daily livelihoods; it implies, in other words, that people acquire certain options in their lives: a socio-economic perspective. Human security, then, entails protection against violence in people's lives and with that freedom from daily fears. Human rights, finally, means defence of fundamental freedoms and basic entitlements by state law, implying, indeed, a functioning state, the rule of law, and good governance.

Human development might be further interpreted in the sense of global responsibilities towards an uplifting of people's material well-being through human empowerment and the elimination of structural constraints to sustainable livelihoods. Naturally, that venture has to do with self-esteem, culture and religion, politics and other aspects of life, too. The 'product' of human development, as mentioned already, is that it provides a *socio-economic perspective*in people's lives.

The lack of a socio-economic perspective, as a result of poverty and exclusion, may be seen as a major factor contributing to intra-state violence. Indeed, the following observation from Adam Smith's *Wealth of Nations* is still applicable:

Commerce and manufactures gradually introduced order and good government, and with them the liberty and security of individuals, among the inhabitants of the country, who had before lived almost in a continual state of war with their neighbours, and of servile dependency upon their superiors. (Smith 1900 [1776]: 214–15)

Conversely, a well-functioning economy requires protection against violence. In a broad sense, security entails safety. Safety implies protection against disaster. Security adds a dimension of prevention: a minimization of threats to human (co)existence. Consequently, it means freedom from disaster, anxiety, attack and violent disruption of what is considered a 'normal' life.

Thus, the three cornerstones of human dignity realization are substantially interlinked. However, in the international venture that took off with the founding of the United Nations in 1945, these missions were compartmentalized into three distinct projects: international security through the Security Council; international justice through distinct Charter and treaty Bodies charged with setting and supervising human rights standards; and international development through the international financial institutions and the UN development agencies. Not surprisingly, however, in the countries at the bottom of the Human Development Index ranking, as annually published in the United Nations Development Program's Human Development Report, significant weaknesses in human security and human rights are correlated. Hence, the challenge remains twofold: to integrate these three separated endeavours, and to renovate each of them in conformity with their human (dignity) dimension. It is, indeed, the intrinsic connection between those three manifestations of human dignity in a public political context – human security, human development and human rights – that constitutes the core of global universal responsibilities.

In order to achieve human security, then, a socio-economic perspective (and hence a functioning economy) is required as well as good governance and the rule of law (and hence a functioning state). For the realization of human rights, it is also important that people enjoy a socio-economic perspective in their lives while living in peace in a context of political stability. This last aspect is important for human development, too, as well as good governance based on the rule of law.

The whole idea of human dignity protection as a universal mission with interconnected implications has a great and diverse cultural backing. However, human dignity as a fundamental standard of judgment easily gets twisted into a norm applying 'to us but not to all those others', implying that the fundamental ideas of human dignity and the core values it sustains are considered inapplicable to the latter. Hence, crucial qualifications of human rights such as 'inalienable' and 'universal' tend to meet with a great deal of practical resistance.

Even more problematic than the support for protection of *everyone*'s human dignity *per se* is the way in which such protection is to be secured. With the formation of nation-states, law became the primary instrument in efforts to protect people's basic dignity. It still plays a vital role today, but the limits of its effectiveness in advancing and protecting human dignity are becoming increasingly manifest.

#### **Equal rights**

The tendency to abuse power is as old as human history; hence the incessant efforts to tie power to certain norms. Where such norms express legal protection of the fundamental freedoms and basic entitlements of each and every human being in the sense of those freedoms and entitlements that refer directly to basic human dignity, we speak of 'human rights'.

This endeavour long predates the UDHR of 1948 as well as the famous eighteenth-century documents such as the French Declaration of the Rights of Man, and is much broader in its application than mere legal protection of interests. Yet, it is precisely the connection with a fundamental rights discourse that constitutes the basis for a unique international venture to provide the global arena with a normative setting in respect of the use of power. Since here human dignity itself is at stake, claims based on such rights should normally trump other types of claims, both private and public.

Yet, reality does not conform to this ideal picture of human rights. While the UN Charter and treaty bodies for country assessments and treatment of cases of human rights violations are meant as effective institutions, there is remarkably little attention to the follow-up of cases in which evident violations of human rights were established. Thus, there is a global *human rights deficit*, manifested particularly in the following realms:

- (1) impunity of state-related perpetrators of human rights abuse, such as government officials, politicians, prison officers, policemen and members of the armed forces;
- (2) human rights violations committed under the cover of the 'public–private divide' such as domestic violence and abuse directed against women and children;
- (3) structurally failing protection of 'minorities', giving rise to collective violence and internal and external displacement of whole groups of people; and
- (4) structural non-implementation of the human rights of those living in situations of extreme poverty and marginalization.

To recall, the way in which the international human rights mission has been conceptualized in legal instruments and mechanisms has placed great emphasis on the second foundational principle of human rights: the quest for inalienable fundamental rights. The major flaws that affect implementation can be traced to this over-reliance on judicially enforceable rights as such. International mechanisms for the realization of human rights were set up as if the emancipatory struggles preceding effective implementation of the legal model had already been definitively concluded with the victory of the allied forces in the Second World War. That model is based on three stages: standard-setting, supervision through monitoring of compliance, and enforcement. Its capacity to enforce international human rights law, however, is rather weak. Indeed, the responsibility for implementing all those internationally *declared* rights still rests basically at the national and local level.

A major complication in this regard is that more than half of the global population live in socio-cultural environments in which the notion of a 'right' is of fairly recent origin (in Bantu languages, for example, there is no word for 'right'), or etymologically close to power *per se* (China, for instance, see Perry 2008). To understand this problematique, let us examine the meaning of rights as envisaged in the human rights mission.

#### **From rights to realized claims**

Rights protect freedoms and entitlements through abstract legal acknowledgment of claims based on these. Thus, they enable us, among other things, to participate in processes of production, distribution and consumption of goods and services. Economic rights represent 'the abstract acknowledgement of the legitimacy of claims to income and to participation in resource allocation' (Samuels 1974: 118). But the problem with rights is their relativity. One individual's rights are limited by another person's rights. Whether the owner's claims will, indeed, be realized, depends also on other people's interests and the possible protection of these interests through rights.

Behind different claims there are different interests. Rights legitimize claims only insofar as there are corresponding obligations on the part of others to respect these rights. This depends on the relative strengths of the respective rights. In a society that tries to settle conflict through law, the conflicting interests are weighed against one another by some institution or person not part of the conflict (a 'judge'), on the basis of norms (rules, rights) as well as the values behind these.

In this respect, law is a process of continuous change in the way in which human behaviour is ordered through making and applying rules and settling disputes. Inevitably, legal rules are imprecise, requiring a non-mechanical application. This makes it impossible, for one thing, to determine in a normative and fully predictable manner which types of loss or injury to private persons should be compensated. The compensation problem, in other words, is theoretically insoluble (Samuels 1974).

Yet, legal anthropologists have taken great trouble in efforts to describe real types of legal order in terms of different distributions of rights and duties among individuals and groups. Such attempts are, however, bound to be frustrated by the radical indeterminacy of any type of legal order. The actuality of pre-existing rights does not imply a pre-existing legality since, as was pointed out above, one person's rights may collide with another person's rights or with public interests. Hence, one might just as well take indeterminacy as the theoretical basis of social, cultural and legal relationships, an indeterminacy which individuals either try to exploit through 'processes of situational adjustment' or try to combat through 'processes of regularization' (Falk Moore 1983: Chapter 7).

Indeed, to have a title – i.e. to be *entitled* – by no means implies having one's rights actually realized. Rights are just *images* of power; to realize a concrete claim, certain action must be taken. Subjective rights, in other words, are generally *action*-oriented. This applies even more to rights of a declared nature such as human rights in general and to economic, social and cultural rights in particular.

Thus, although in international and national human rights the equal dignity line tends to be of minor significance as opposed to the strict focus on each fundamental right separately, it still plays its part as a *legal principle* in both legislative and judicial law development. But in practice the impact of human rights on actual arrangements, relations and decisions may well be much higher in their role as political standards of legitimacy.4 It is particularly in the formation and execution of political, economic and cultural power that its impact as a *political principle* could be considerably enhanced.

#### **References**

- De Blois, M.1998. 'Self-Determination or Human Dignity: The Core Principle of Human Rights', in A. Hendriks and J. Smith (eds.), *To Baehr in Our Minds: Essays on Human Rights from the Heart of the Netherlands*. Utrecht: Netherlands Institute of Human Rights
- Dworkin, R. 1978. *Taking Rights Seriously*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Falk Moore, S. 1983. *Law as Process: An Anthropological Approach*. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul
- Gilroy, P. 2009. 'Race and the Right To Be Human'. Inaugural address of 3 December, 2009, delivered on accepting the Treaty of Utrecht Chair, Faculty of Humanities, Utrecht
- Griffin, J. 2008. *On Human Rights*. Oxford University Press
- Klein Goldewijk, B., and De Gaay Fortman, B. 1999. *Where Needs Meet Rights: Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in a New Perspective*. Geneva: WCC Publications
- Margalit, A. 1996. *The Decent Society*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Perry, E. 2008. 'Chinese Conceptions of "Rights": From Mencius to Mao And Now', *Perspectives on Politics* 6(1): 37–50
- Samuels, W. J. 1974. 'An Economic Perspective on the Compensation Problem', *Wayne Law Review* 21: 113–34
- Smith, A. 1900 [1776]. *An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations*. London: George Routledge & Son
- Wermiel, S. J. 1998. 'Law and Human Dignity: The Judicial Soul of Justice Brennan', *William and Mary Bill of Rights Journal* 7(1): 223–40
- 4 The notion of legitimacy relates to the use of power, implying simply that the rule of the rulers is acceptable to the ruled. Yet, as its meaning is to transform power into authority it relates not just to the outcome of the use of power as assessed by those affected but also to the observance of accepted principles and institutions, and to due process (Klein Goldewijk and De Gaay Fortman 1999: 118–19).