## Human dignity as universal nobility CHRISTIAN NEUHAUSER AND ¨ RALF STOECKER

The concept of human dignity, despite its growing importance in legal texts and declarations in the last decades, is notoriously contested in moral philosophy and legal theory. There is no agreement either on what human dignity is or whether one should care much about it. We will show how these questions could be answered given the assumption that the expression 'human dignity' is to be read literally, as dignity of humans, where 'dignity' is understood as *dignity proper*, i.e. dignity as it is usually ascribed outside of legal contexts. Dignity proper has played an important role in the history of mankind. It is sometimes also called 'social dignity' because it is bound to social relations, or 'contingent dignity', on the assumption that having dignity proper is due to contingencies of life and one's own behaviour (in contrast to human dignity as an essential feature of humankind). Dignity proper therefore depends on being treated with respect by others and on being able to present oneself as being of equal dignity in various practical contexts.

Dignity proper is part of an extended conceptual space of evaluative terms which are important in moral life, including, among others, decency, nobility, rank, honour, respect, esteem, grace, decorum, merit, self-respect, coolness, offence, humiliation, degradation, shame. It is obvious, historically, that the concept of dignity proper must have played some role in the development of the concept of human dignity. There are a number of good reasons, however, that speak for a sharp distinction between human dignity and dignity proper:

- (1) Most importantly, dignity proper is fragile, it has to be earned and can be lost, it is unequally distributed and perhaps also bound to conditions like social status, birth etc. Human dignity on the other hand is usually regarded as innate, inviolable, and equally shared by all men and women.
- (2) Despite its prevalence in everyday moral talk, reference to dignity proper is apparently rather old-fashioned. Only a minority of people would regard dignity proper as being of utmost value, compared to other values like well-being, health, leading one's life as one chooses etc. Human dignity on the other hand is believed to be the most fundamental and powerful value.
- (3) Human dignity is strongly debated in an area of bioethics where dignity proper evidently is not an issue at all: with regard to the way human embryos

should be treated. Thus, it seems, either this debate has been off target from the outset, or human dignity is very different from dignity proper.

On the other hand, though, there are a number of considerations which point into the opposite direction and therefore encourage attempts to explain human dignity in terms of dignity proper:

- (1) Although disrespect of dignity proper usually does not amount to a violation of human dignity, violations of human dignity at least frequently seem to be humiliating as well. This has to be accounted for.
- (2) While the expression 'dignity' apparently is somewhat outdated and of minor importance in most people's lives, other elements from the *conceptual family of dignity*, like decency, self-respect, offence, humiliation, shame, make up a large part of the fabric of everyday moral considerations. Therefore, the 'idea of dignity' plays a much more important part in modern life than one might expect from the restrained usage of the word. It indicates a realm of moral evaluation beyond rights, duties and utility that is of philosophical interest in any case, and as a whole may pile up to something essential like human dignity.
- (3) The importance of dignity proper for everyday evaluations is confirmed by the observation that elements of its conceptual family figure prominently in many different issues of applied ethics.
- (4) Finally, the historical roots of the concept of human dignity suggest its interpretation in terms of dignity proper.

Since it is our aim to explore the promises of an account of human dignity in terms of dignity proper, we will take up item (3) first and provide an overview on the role of dignity proper in different areas of practical ethics. We will then formulate three challenges that dignity proper has put forward to philosophy historically, before we take up the original question again and outline three different possibilities of connecting dignity proper with human dignity leading finally to the idea of human dignity as universal nobility that we take to be the most attractive proposal yet.

#### **Dignity proper in applied ethics**

Dignity proper plays an important role in a surprising variety of different areas of applied ethics.

#### Nursing ethics

In 2009, English nursing ethicist Ann Gallagher started her editorial for an issue of the journal *Nursing Ethics* as follows: 'It might be said that dignity is the new autonomy. Autonomy has been the focus of western bioethics for some three decades. Now the ethical turn is towards dignity' (Gallagher 2009: 145). According to her, what went wrong in hospitals in the last decades was not so much that patients' autonomy was violated, but that their dignity was not sufficiently respected. As she, among others, has shown in the last years, patients as well as nursing staff frequently complain about indignity in healthcare facilities (for example, Franklin, Ternestedt and Nordenfelt 2006; Gallagher, Li, Wainwright, Jones and Lee 2008; Jacobson 2009). These complaints may be roughly grouped into three different categories. First, the patients' privacy is endangered by the way hospital wards are constructed and organized as well as by irresponsible behaviour of the nurses, who put the patient in his or her weakness, nakedness and plight on display to other people. Second, there is a tendency, in the special asymmetric bedside situation, to ignore the rules of normal civilized interaction and to switch either to a patronizing or a parade-ground attitude towards the patients, or simply to *act upon* them instead of *interacting with* them. Third, the patients' weaknesses and disabilities easily lead to a paternalistic tendency on the side of the nurses to take over control instead of supporting self-control, and hence deprive the patients of their means of leading their lives despite being ill.

#### Psychiatric ethics

Although respect for the patients' dignity is a universal demand in medical ethics, it is of special importance with regard to patients who are particularly vulnerable: psychiatric in-patients. When in 1793 the French physician Phillipe Pinel unchained the inhabitants of the Parisian hospital Bicetre and initiated the ˆ practice of giving patients therapeutic treatment instead of merely keeping them behind bars, he was described as restoring their dignity. In the 1950s, the American sociologist Erving Goffman spent some time as a visiting scholar in a mental hospital, which resulted in his famous study, *Asylums*, where he described in painstaking detail the mechanisms of humiliation in psychiatric institutions (Goffman 2007). Although today the situation has changed considerably, it is still very much debated whether the patients' dignity is sufficiently respected in psychiatry. It seems that the peculiar features of interaction between mentally disturbed patients and the hospital staff is particularly prone to violations of dignity. This is most obvious in situations where the patient is treated involuntarily and under physical constraint. Moreover, there is the difficult question whether and how far the therapists are obliged to guard the patient's dignity against the patient herself or himself, for example in the case of mania.

#### Dying with dignity

Another area of bioethics where dignity plays a prominent role is the debate on euthanasia. Interestingly enough, proponents of both sides refer to the traditional idea of dying with dignity. They differ, however, in what it is that makes death dignified. Defenders of a right to euthanasia emphasize the importance of being in control of one's path through life instead of being at the mercy of fate, and moreover they point to the undignified concomitants of the last stages of death (pain, anxiety, mental disorientation etc.) that might be avoided by euthanasia. Opponents of a right to euthanasia, on the other hand, usually react in (at least) one of three ways: either they emphasize the advanced facilities of modern palliative medicine and care which make it unnecessary to have oneself killed, or they point out the particular dignity of facing the evils of dying and death with courage (Kass 2002), or finally they claim a fundamental incompatibility between dignity and killing that morally forecloses euthanasia (although it might be argued that what is supposed in this third claim is not dignity proper).

#### Punishment

In the ethics of punishment, there are three somewhat interlocking discussions about dignity proper. First, it is discussed in how far the authorities are obliged to take care that while punishing offenders they also minimize violations of their dignity. Prison sentences usually lead to a social degradation of the prisoner, but one can still arrange the situation in jail in a more or less dignified/humiliating way. The crucial question here is, whether there is any moral obligation for the state to respect the offender's dignity (Whitman 2005).

Second, it is debated whether*capital punishment* violates the convict's dignity proper. It is evident that the way capital punishment is executed in many countries is deeply humiliating. It is less clear, however, whether this is necessarily so, and moreover whether such an offence to dignity proper would entail that the death penalty is incompatible with human dignity.

The topic of the third discussion is the moral assessment of so-called 'shame punishment'. For the whole history of punishment humiliation and degradation have been intentionally employed as punitive measures. Under the influence of philosophers and legal theorists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, shame punishment was progressively banned from the penal codes of more and more developed countries. Some twenty years ago, however, it made a comeback in the United States, leading to a fresh interest in the moral assessment of shame, humiliation and hence of dignity proper (for an overview, see Harvard Law Review 2003).

#### Discrimination

In a newspaper interview, an American pop singer of Italian origin, Tony Bennett, told a story from mid-1950s Florida where he and the famous black jazz musician Duke Ellington had performed at the opening gala of a fancy hotel; Bennett was accommodated in the hotel, but Ellington had to stay somewhere else. Obviously, various kinds of degradation and disrespect make up the fabric of all kinds of discrimination – racism, sexism, discrimination on the basis of religion, sexual orientation and disability – besides the coarse girders of unequal rights and physical suppression. And today still, even from the univocal intention not to discriminate, there are a number of problems concerning how to avoid humiliation and offence, for example with respect to terminology or for instance in job applications.

#### Living conditions

One of the first occurrences of the notion of human dignity in legal documents is to be found in the Constitution of the Weimar Republic, which came into effect in 1919. Article 151 of the Constitution demands that the economic order must serve the aim of establishing a '*menschenw¨urdiges Dasein*' for everybody. This claim is not surprising, since there had been repeated complaints about the undignified life of the working class during the nineteenth century, for example by Friedrich Engels. In the history of the labour movement, class struggle is frequently described as being based on the dignity of the suppressed workers (Bloch 1985; Appiah 2010). Today, there are still many areas where people have to work in undignified conditions, for example because the work is so excruciatingly hard or because it forces workers into particularly degrading situations as in the sex industry. Moreover, there are many conditions in which people have to make their living that hardly qualify as labour but are all the more deplorable because they are so deeply humiliating, for example digging for something edible in garbage dumps or trying not to starve on a trail of refugees. The ethical debate on global exploitation, new forms of slavery, poverty and hunger would be utterly inadequate if it did not mention the degrading aspects of living under such poor conditions (cf. Schaber 2011).

#### Torture

Although torture was prevalent during the whole of the twentieth century, there was a span of time by the end of the century when torture was univocally banned by moral philosophers and legal theorists. In the wake of 9/11 this ban started to crumble again and new discussions on possible justifications for torture set in. Obviously, torture is somehow related to dignity proper; this became vivid at the pictures of Abu Ghraib. For understanding the relationship between dignity proper and human dignity, however, it is important to shift the focus from possible justifications of torture to the question why univocally vile cases of torture are so disgusting and abhorrent.

In this respect, the blood-soaked history of the twentieth century has provided moral philosophy with ample material, for example in autobiographical reports by survivors of concentration camps and gulags (Des Pres 1980). Obviously, the evil in how these victims were treated has many faces. Every moral right or claim they had was constantly trampled upon. It is revealing that for them and also in the eyes of their tormentors, what constituted essential elements of their ordeal were the permanent, deliberate attacks against their dignity proper. As Terence Des Pres put it: 'The survivor preserves his life, but also his humaneness, against a situation in which, at every turn, decency seems stupid or impossible' (*ibid*.: 45). Yet, the tormentors took great pains to break their victims' resistance. The reports Des Pres has collected describe the variety of attacks on the dignity of the victims, for example the omnipresence of dirt, the hellish stench, the constant plight of urinating and defecating, the assaults by lice and other vermin, the loss of all personal belongings, the total helplessness against insults and maltreatment, the pains of hunger, illness, fatigue and despair.

#### Daily life

The importance of dignity proper in exceptional situations, in hospitals, prisons and concentration camps, should not lead one into underestimating its role in daily life. As William Ian Miller has vividly shown in his book, *Humiliation*, modern social life has inherited much of the concept and many mechanisms that can already be found in early honour-based cultures (like the culture of saga Iceland) (Miller 1993). Respect and offense, recognition and disdain are at least as prevalent in daily social interaction as the obeying and ignoring of rules and rights. And they raise ethical issues, for example whether only individual persons are to be respected or if states, nations or genders can have a claim to respect as well (Neuhauser ¨ 2011). Moreover, in the context of daily life the question that was already touched upon in relation to euthanasia becomes more important: namely, if dignity proper gives rise to moral obligations to oneself (see Hill 1991).

#### **Historical roots of dignity proper**

The list of issues in applied ethics raising questions of dignity proper shows that any moral philosophy which intends to stay close to our life–world morality has to say something about the role and value of dignity proper and its conceptual relatives. But dignity proper has also played a more general role in the history of philosophy that may not be evident at first sight, but should be taken seriously in order to gain a better understanding of the relationship between dignity proper and human dignity. In what follows, we will distinguish three different (though interrelated) challenges of dignity proper to philosophy.

#### The ethical challenge

Ethics in the original sense of the term is the art of leading a good life; and in the ethical philosophy of antiquity dignity plays an important role. The first famous treatment is to be found in Aristotle's reflections on magnanimity (NE 1123), but perhaps the most prominent text about the importance of dignity proper for a good life is Cicero's *De officiis*, where he describes in minute detail how to lead one's life appropriately, and in particular how to keep one's decorum as an essential part of one's life conduct. Cicero's work was not only important because of his claim that one has to take great care for one's dignity but also in his elaboration on the facets of dignified behaviour that mirror more or less the rules of honour of the Roman aristocracy: gravity, solemnity, self-mastery. Both questions (regarding the ethical value of dignified behaviour and its characteristic components) run through the history of ethics, they are for example found in Kant's treatment of servility in his *Metaphysics of Morals*. And John Stuart Mill, who faced the problem that the utilitarian focus on hedonism seems to lead to a philosophy for 'happy pigs', drew upon 'a sense of dignity, which all human beings possess in one form or other . . . and which is so essential a part of the happiness of those in whom it is strong, that nothing which conflicts with it could be, otherwise than momentarily, an object of desire to them' (Mill 1998: 57). Today, this topic is discussed under the heading of *self-respect*, where self-respect is understood as a person's concern about his or her dignity proper (cf. Dillon 1995).

#### The metaphysical challenge

It was a central question for stoic philosophy of how to maintain one's dignity under unfavourable external circumstances. Seneca, Epictetus and other Roman authors recurrently explained how to act in a dignified way even under extremely hostile conditions, for example as a captive or slave. In this respect, they laid the foundation for a distinction of remaining importance: between *external* and *internal* dignity or honour. 'Internal' is to be read as independent of appraisal or respect by others, whilst 'external' refers to a type of dignity that is dependent precisely on others' recognition. The stoic Sage paradigmatically rendered his dignity immune against the uncertain chances of social life in the Roman Empire, so that he could not lose control over things important for him and thereby be degraded and humiliated.

This very practical and reasonable concern about the conditions of dignity under uncertain and harsh political conditions, however, led to a much more detached, philosophical concern about dignity proper: the question whether the metaphysical conditions of human life are per definition humiliating. There seem to be several good reasons to assume they are, as often expressed in poetry: the uncertainties of destiny seem to pre-empt human claims of power and control, almighty divine beings annihilate any human ambition, the overwhelming size and lifespan of the everlasting cosmos apparently reduces the individual human being to wormlike nothingness, the inevitability of death threatens to destroy all future aspirations. Philosophers' concern with the metaphysical conditions of human life frequently culminated in worries about the status of man under these potentially degrading circumstances; and many prominent anthropological claims could be read as attempts to meet this challenge and find a way of retaining dignity for humans, typically with recourse to a special relationship to God (being created in God's image), freedom of choice (for example, Pico della Mirandola), reason (for example, Pascal), morality (for example, Kant) or even the last resort of leading an absurd revolt (for example, Camus). Others, like B. F. Skinner, tried to bite the bullet and to accept that in a determined world there is no place for keeping one's dignity (Skinner 2007).

What is remarkable about these attempts is that the contemporary idea of degradation still rests on the ancient aristocratic concept of dignity: power, self-mastery, standing upright.

#### The moral challenge

Dignity proper always combined normative constraints of the dignified person herself (self-respect) with constraints regarding the way others had to treat this person (respect). While the former constraints played an important part throughout the history of philosophy (that is, the ethical challenge), the latter constraints came into focus comparatively late, only by the end of the eighteenth century, when political philosophers started to wonder whether there are basic constituents of respect that are owed not only to certain dignitaries but to everyone. Thomas Paine, for example, defended the French revolutionaries against Edmund Burke's attempts to ridicule the idea that everybody has to be treated as a person with dignity. In contemporary moral philosophy, this idea seems to be more of a widely shared background condition than a topic of explicit theoretical concern. John Rawls, for instance, in *A Theory of Justice*, describes self-respect as 'perhaps the most important primary good' (Rawls 1999: 386), but he is not merely interested in self-respect as part of leading a good life (i.e. as a response to the ethical challenge) but also as something that has to be secured by the way in which the basic structure of society is organized. Joel Feinberg relies on dignity proper when he defends a right-based moral theory against a duty-based moral theory. He illustrates this distinction by a fictional society, Nowheresville, where everybody obeys his or her duties towards their comrades and hence all demands of duty-based ethical theories are fulfilled. Nonetheless, Nowheresville is a deeply inhuman society because in order not to violate the dignity of its members it is not enough that people are treated properly out of duty, it is necessary that they are treated properly because they have moral claim rights to be respected by others (Feinberg 1970). Again, dignity proper in its traditional dependence on power and self-mastery is considered as fundamental to the extent it even allows for a decision between two basic moral approaches. Similarly, Harry Frankfurt has argued that equality as such has no value at all, but gains its fundamental appeal from the humiliating character of being treated unequally (Frankfurt 1999). And Avishai Margalit, in his influential book, *The Decent Society*, explicitly contrasted a decent society 'whose institutions do not humiliate people' (Margalit 1996: 1) with the usual political ideal of a just society. In a more recent book, Margalit emphasized the importance of dignity proper for political philosophy in distinguishing, within the realm of non-decent societies, between those which are merely nondecent in that institutions *sometimes* humiliate people, and regimes like Nazi Germany where it is part of their *nature* to be cruel and humiliating. With the latter, according to Margalit, no compromises should be made, because such compromises would always be rotten (Margalit 2010).

#### **Dignity proper and human dignity**

At least part of the topics sketched so far might also show up in presentations of the concept of human dignity instead of dignity proper, for example torture and poverty, the ideas of Pico della Mirandola and Skinner, equal dignity for everybody and the merits of the decent society. It is therefore time to pick up the question of the very beginning of how dignity proper and human dignity are related.

#### Human dignity as dignity as a human

In light of the historical sketch of the importance of dignity proper, one can distinguish three ways in which human dignity and dignity proper might be connected. The first way is to be found as early as in the writings of Cicero. In *De officiis*, Cicero did not merely describe the ways a person has to behave as a member of a particular social class or as the holder of a certain office. Cicero also emphasized that people have dignities just by being humans and not mere brutes. As beings able to reason and gain knowledge they are obliged to behave accordingly; otherwise they would disrespect their dignity as humans, in short: their human dignity. One way to connect human dignity to dignity proper is to assume that in addition to the various social roles people play they also occupy a role just by sharing human nature which (like the other roles) entails duties to behave in certain ways.

This proposal fits well with the metaphysical challenge, i.e. the threat that human nature confines us to an undignified, disgraceful and miserable existence. It also fits well with the proposal from the eighteenth century that as a human everybody shares a kind of inborn nobility that has to be respected by his or her fellows. However, just some kind of residual dignity that every person shares, no matter how dignified or undignified she is in other respects, would hardly justify the high esteem which is usually conferred to human dignity.

#### Human dignity as universal rank

At this point, a lesson from the Christian understanding of dignity might fit in, according to which human dignity, since it is conferred by God, is of infinitely higher value and rank than any possible social dignity could be. Compared to the shared status of human dignity, all other differences in dignity between people vanish. This second line of thought was emphasized in recent publications by James Q. Whitman and Jeremy Waldron. As Waldron writes: 'once associated with hierarchical differentiations of rank and status, "dignity" now conveys the idea that all human persons belong to the same rank and that rank is a very high one indeed, in many ways as high as those that were formerly regarded as ranks of nobility' (Waldron 2007: 201). This is the position of human dignity as universal rank, which is employed by Whitman as a possible explanation of the different roles that considerations of dignity proper play in the legal systems in the United States and in middle Europe, for example in Germany and France: while in the United States there is a certain tendency to deny rank to everybody, Europeans traditionally confer it equally even to defendants and prisoners (Whitman 2005).

The proposal to regard human dignity as universal rank is very attractive historically as well as systematically. It is for instance spelled out in Stephen Darwall's (1977) influential proposal to distinguish between recognition-respect that is owed to all humans and appraisal-respect that is owed to particular human beings for their achievements. The emphasis here lies on the categorical priority of recognition-respect. Yet, the idea of universal rank also raises at least two severe difficulties. First, it remains an open question how to justify the claim that human beings have such a high rank. Offhand, it appears to be a blunt instance of speciesism. Second, it is not clear why characteristic features of dignity proper, namely, that it can be gained and lost, are not shared by human dignity.

#### Human dignity as universal nobility

At this point, it is important to consider another approach to human dignity that goes back to the sociologist Niklas Luhmann (Luhmann 1965). His proposal is based on the assumption that modern societies have changed the traditional role structure in such a way that everybody has to fulfil different roles at the same time. In order to succeed, people have to build up another role besides and above those special roles: the role of an individual person. The modern concept of dignity is bound to this individual role. Persons have to be respected, not necessarily in their social roles nor in their role as human beings (whatever this may be), but in their role as individuals who construct and uphold an individual personality with certain idiosyncratic features and preferences.

Luhmann was a sociologist, not a normative moral philosopher. His proposal, however, allows for an amendment of the idea of universal rank. According to this third line of thought, what has happened in the past 200 years was not merely a kind of generous upgrading of everybody into a high rank but also an *individualization* of these high ranks. While at the time of the French Revolution people had a rather traditional conception of which kind of behaviour is dignified and which is not, people today live in a variety of different ways with different conceptions of decency. Moral philosophy is rather reluctant to prescribe the ways people should lead their lives within the loose boundaries of what is morally acceptable, yet almost everybody is aware that building up and maintaining an individual personality presupposes a hospitable or at least a non-hostile climate of respect and support.

During the 1930s and 1940s many people all over the world had to suffer a radical loss of respect in this sense. It therefore is not surprising that after the Second World War the universal claim to respect of one's dignity that already was influential outside of legal systems (for example, in novels and political statements) entered the new declarations and constitutions. And it was not unexpected either that in the post-war period the victims of suppression and persecution all over the world complained about violations of human dignity.

Human dignity, according to the third proposal, is not a special kind of dignity proper, it rather stands for the general value of having dignity proper respected and supported in modern societies. Since it is not a dignity in itself it obviously cannot be diminished or forfeited, in this sense it is inborn and inviolable. In order to emphasize the close connection as well as the difference to the second proposal we suggest calling it: the idea of human dignity as universal nobility (Stoecker 2011).

#### **References**

- Appiah, A. 2010. *The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen*. New York, London: W. W. Norton
- Bloch, E. 1985. *Naturrecht und menschliche W¨urde*. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
- Des Pres, T.1980. *The Survivor: An Anatomy of Life in the Death Camps*. Oxford University Press
- Dillon, R. S. 1995. *Dignity, Character, and Self-Respect*. New York: Routledge
- Feinberg, J. 1970. 'The Nature and Value of Rights', *Journal of Value Inquiry WINT* 70(4): 263–7
- Frankfurt, H. 1999. 'Equality and Respect', in Harry Frankfurt (ed.), *Necessity, Volition, and Love*. Cambridge University Press, 146–54
- Franklin, L. L., Ternestedt, B. M., and Nordenfelt, L. 2006. 'Views on Dignity of Elderly Nursing Home Residents', *Nursing Ethics* 13(2): 130–46
- Gallagher, A. 2009. 'Dignity as a Virtue: Appreciating Ambiguity', *Nursing Ethics* 16(2): 145–6
- Gallagher, A., Li, S., Wainwright, P., Jones, I. R., and Lee, D. 2008. 'Dignity in the Care of Older People – A Review of the Theoretical and Empirical Literature', *BMC Nurse* 7: 11
- Goffman, E. 2007. *Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates*. New Brunswick, NJ: Aldine Transaction
- Harvard Law Review. 2003. 'Shame, Stigma, and Crime: Evaluating the Efficacy of Shaming Sanctions in Criminal Law', *Harvard Law Review* 116(7): 2186–207
- Hill, T. E. 1991. *Autonomy and Self-Respect*. Cambridge University Press
- Jacobson, N. 2009. 'Dignity Violation in Health Care', *Qualitative Health Research* 19(11): 1536–47
- Kass, L. 2002. *Life, Liberty, and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge for Bioethics*. San Francisco: Encounter Books
- Luhmann, N. 1965. *Grundrechte als Institution*. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot
- Margalit, A. 1996. *The Decent Society*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
	- 2010. *On Compromise and Rotten Compromises*. Princeton University Press
- Mill, J. S. 1998. *Utilitarianism*. Oxford University Press
- Miller, W. I. 1993. *Humiliation: And Other Essays on Honor, Social Discomfort, and Violence*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press
- Neuhauser, C. ¨ 2011. 'Humiliation: The Collective Dimension', in P. Kaufmann, H. Kuch, C. Neuhauser ¨ *et al*. (eds.). *Humiliation, Degradation, Dehumanization*. Dordrecht: Springer, 21–36
- Rawls, J. 1999. *A Theory of Justice*. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press
- Schaber, P. 2011. 'Absolute Poverty', in P. Kaufmann, H. Kuch, C. Neuhauser ¨ *et al*. (eds.). *Humiliation, Degradation, Dehumanization*. Dordrecht: Springer, 151–8
- Skinner, B. F. 2007. *Beyond Freedom and Dignity*. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett
- Stoecker, R. 2011. 'Three Crucial Turns on the Road to an Adequate Understanding of Human Dignity', in P. Kaufmann, H. Kuch, C. Neuhauser ¨ *et al*. (eds.). *Humiliation, Degradation, Dehumanization*. Dordrecht: Springer, 7–17
- Waldron, J. 2007. 'Dignity and Rank', *European Journal of Sociology* 48(2): 201–37
- Whitman, J. Q. 2005. *Harsh Justice: Criminal Punishment and the Widening Divide Between America and Europe*. Oxford University Press