### Human dignity and social welfare KLAUS STEIGLEDER

**The normative concept of dignity**

As a strictly normative concept, dignity was introduced into moral philosophy by Immanuel Kant. It signifies an absolute value. Ultimately, a person possessing dignity must not be an offset against somebody else. She may not be sacrificed for the sake of another person or other persons. Thus, her dignity constitutes a strict limit to the actions of others. Furthermore, mutual positive duties derive from the dignity of a person. Accordingly, dignity is the basis of claim rights, since the normative concept of dignity is explicated by determinate claim rights. At the same time, one can gather from the concept of dignity how rights are to be understood as a whole, which requirements any adequate theory of claim rights must fulfil, and what the mutual duties between the bearers of dignity and rights are. The following are the four most important principles which accrue from the normative concept of dignity.

First, the normative concept of dignity is not gradable. It is impossible for one being to possess more dignity than another. Rather, all beings that possess dignity possess the same dignity and the same fundamental rights. Thus, a fundamental normative equality exists between each bearer of dignity.

Second, the normative concept of dignity implies the existence of *absolute* rights. An absolute right is a right which under no circumstances can be superseded by another right. To be sure, most of the rights that originate from dignity are not absolute rights, but some are. Under certain conditions, a more important right of one person may supersede a less important right of another person, for example the right to life may supersede the right to property. But under no circumstances may one or more bearers of dignity supersede another bearer of dignity. Therefore, each bearer of dignity possesses an absolute right to life.1

Third, the rights grounded by dignity are not only negative rights, i.e. rights to forbearance, but also positive rights, i.e. rights to assistance.

Fourth, dignity is inalienable insofar as an agent may forfeit certain rights, but never his dignity and therefore never all of his rights. Thus, a bearer of

<sup>1</sup> For a more precise determination of this right, see Gewirth 1981. See also the critique by Levinson 1982 and the reply by Gewirth 1982.

dignity who has committed a crime thereby does not lose his dignity. It follows that the criminal must always be treated as a bearer of dignity and must not be punished in a way that is incompatible with his dignity.

A moral theory whose basis is the normative concept of dignity differs from two other families of moral theories, namely, utilitarianism and libertarianism. In contrast to utilitarianism, which is interested in cumulative results and the maximization of the aggregate utility, theories which are based on the normative concept of dignity have a distributive focus. Each bearer of dignity constitutes a strict limit to the actions of others. Within rights-based theories, theories based on dignity differ from libertarian theories by recognizing genuine and original positive rights or at least original positive duties, as in the case of Kant, whereas libertarian theories only recognize negative rights but no original positive duties.2

#### **The content of the rights, positive rights and the necessity of organized institutions**

In the following, I will presuppose with Gewirth that through his dignity every agent possesses claim rights to the necessary conditions of his self-fulfilling agency (Gewirth 1978).3 These consist in his freedom and the further necessary conditions enabling him to act and to act successfully at all. For instance, in order to be able to act at all, an agent needs his life and his physical and psychological integrity. Gewirth calls the rights to these preconditions *basic rights* (Gewirth 1978: 212). In order to be able to act successfully at all the agent must on the one hand be able to preserve her level of purpose fulfilment. Among the necessary preconditions for this are not being lied to nor being stolen from. Gewirth called the rights to these preconditions 'non-subtractive rights' (Gewirth1978: 233). On the other hand, the agent must be able to enhance his level of purpose fulfilment. Among the necessary preconditions for this are self-esteem and education. Gewirth called the rights to these preconditions 'additive rights' (Gewirth 1978: 241). These rights show a certain order or hierarchy. Thus, rights can possess a situationally variable pertinence and urgency. Given certain circumstances, rights can supersede other rights. Miller's right to life may supersede Smith's property rights if Smith possesses food in abundance and Miller is starving. Moreover, basic rights may take precedence over non-subtractive or additive rights. A small, short or temporary infringement of a right may be justified if a severe, longer or dispositional infringement of a right can only be averted securely or effectively by this breach. So, to use the terminology proposed by

<sup>2</sup> At this point I will not seek to explain why Kant did not recognize basic positive rights. For this, see Steigleder 2002. There (Ibid.: 254–59), I have also tried to show that Kant argues in favour of positive second-order rights which today we would call rights to social welfare.

<sup>3</sup> For an introduction to this concept see Chapter 24 by Beyleveld in this volume.

Judith Thomson, not every infringement of a right is a (morally forbidden) violation of a right (Thomson 1986: 40–2, 51–5).

The important point to note is that moral rights based on dignity are not unconnected. For, on the one hand, they serve a common purpose or rationale, namely, to secure the necessary conditions of an agent's ability to act, to act successfully at all and thus to have the possibility to lead a self-fulfilling life. On the other hand, the agents are connected by their rights. There exists a fundamental normative equality between them. They possess the same dignity and the same rights serving the same purpose or rationale. And so the right of one agent can situationally take priority over a right or rights of other agents. It follows that we must distinguish between the fundamental and the actual scope of rights, and be aware that the equal rights of agents adapt to different conditions and circumstances. They may therefore partially differ both in content and in urgency for different agents or groups of agents. So, for example, there are differences between the rights of persons with disabilities and the rights of persons without disabilities.

As already mentioned, the rights of agents are not only negative rights, i.e. rights to forbearance, but also positive rights, i.e. rights to assistance. This is a direct consequence of the agent's rights claims being based on the normative concept of dignity. But the obligation to assist somebody affects the rights of agents in a way the obligation to forbearance does not. Thus, regardless of any prior contractual or other obligations, there can only be a rights-based obligation to help or assist somebody, (1) if a right to a necessary condition of agency is concerned, (2) if the rights-holder is unable to help herself and (3) if the possible helper is able to help 'at no comparable cost' (Gewirth 1978: 218). If Smith's life is in danger and Miller can help Smith only by endangering his own life or by undergoing substantial risks to his long-term health, then Smith will have no right to Miller's help, and Miller will have no obligation to help Smith. But, if Miller can help without endangering important rights of his own or of others, Miller will be strictly obligated to help Smith by trying to save Smith's life. The criterion of 'no comparable cost' presupposes the hierarchy of rights and follows from the equality of rights between agents. From this equality, it also follows that a necessary condition for the duty to assistance is that the person to be assisted is not able to help herself.

But the criterion of 'no comparable cost' seems to give rise to an important objection against the existence of positive rights. Since so many persons live in dire straits, the fulfilment of their positive rights would lead to an overload of duties on the part of their potential helpers. This overload would severely impair the potential helpers in their ability to lead a life in accordance with their own rights, such that they would not be able to help at no comparable cost. Therefore, the objection concludes, they do not have the obligations to help and the persons living in dire straits do not have the positive rights grounding such obligations. Still, it is important to note that the objection pertains only to the *scope* of positive rights, not to their*existence*. If they cannot help themselves, each of the persons living in dire straits has positive rights to the assistance of others, whenever those others are able to help at no comparable costs. Nevertheless, and here lies the strength of the objection, the circumstances implying a duty to assistance might be limited to certain situations which manifest a singular acute need for help. Many or most circumstances of multiple or chronic needs for help may be excluded from this duty.

The putative weight of the objection derives from the misleading assumption that it is only relevant what an agent can do on her own. But it does not follow from the fact that each single agent may not be able to help at no comparable costs that agents could not do so when acting in concert. And even if we are not obliged to provide individual help we might nevertheless be under the strong obligation to contribute to the joint fulfilment of common duties.

There is a common duty to ensure the effective protection of the rights of every agent so that his or her rights are really respected. But the implementation of common duties is highly problematic, not least because there are severe problems of coordination. The solution to these coordination problems is the establishment and arrangement of organized institutions that provide for the fulfilment of the common duties of agents. It is the task of these institutions to make sure that the rights of agents are effectively protected and respected. Thus, each agent will fulfil her part of the common duties, if she supports those organized institutions. She is therefore strictly obliged to do so.

These considerations lead to the justification of the state, but they can be applied to the establishment of international regimes and of global institutions as well. Thus, dignity also justifies second-order rights, i.e. rights ensuring that one's first-order rights are effectively secured and protected. Duties correspond to these rights. These second-order duties augment the first-order duties and can modify first-order rights. The state must fulfil both the tasks of the minimal state with legal institutions, including the establishment and implementation of a police system and a criminal law, and the tasks of the supportive or welfare state. And the state must be organized as a democratic constitutional state.

#### **The welfare state**

The welfare state is confronted with a number of complexities. But, within the confines of this chapter, I have to restrict myself to a few remarks concerning these complexities.

First, the content of the common duties is not independent of the prevalent social structures within communities. The common duties arising in agrarian societies with subsistence farming, extended families and village communities differ from the duties that have to be performed in industrial societies characterized by an extreme division of labour, big cities and nuclear families. Whereas, in agricultural societies, the loss of employment may be compensated through farming on one's own land, the loss of employment under the conditions of extreme division of labour in industrialized countries tends to amount to the loss of the means of existence (Keyssar 1986). Thus, social arrangements must be made in order to guarantee that unemployment or disability do not lead to the loss of the means of existence.

Second, in general it is the task of the welfare state to assist its citizens actively in the protection of their elementary rights. This comprises the provision of the material requirements necessary to lead a decent life should the agent be incapable of providing for himself. It also comprises the provision of adequate healthcare. A further task of the welfare state is to make sure that its citizens possess the intellectual preconditions of leading an autonomous and self-fulfilling life. Therefore, it has to provide for adequate schooling and education.

Third, it is difficult indeed to determine what a 'decent' life and 'adequate' healthcare and schooling and education consist of. These questions cannot be dealt with independently of the capacities of the society in question. Thus, it is an important societal task to provide for the wealth of the society as a whole so that the tasks of the welfare state can be fulfilled as comprehensively as possible. A functioning, productive and sustainable economy is an important public good. The possibilities for agents to lead a self-fulfilling life, the range of assistance agents are able to offer at no comparable costs and the extent of protection and advancement of rights the government can foster are all depending on it. If it is true that a functioning, productive and sustainable economy must be a market economy, which indeed is in need of regulations but cannot be planned, then the government has no direct command over that on which its abilities and the abilities of the governed are highly dependent. Therefore, questions of social justice are, on the whole, not independent from questions of efficiency. Policies which are meant to correct injustices and to implement more just regulations may turn out to be counterproductive because they have deleterious effects on the economy. The question how to establish a just and sustainable welfare state is therefore a most complicated matter. The answers to these normative questions are highly dependent on disputed, unclear or unknown factual questions, so that there probably are no ideal solutions and no single correct answer. This is one of the reasons the state must be constitutionally democratic and allow for democratic competition and decision-making processes to ensure the balance between competing convictions and possible solutions.

Fourth, the assistance of the welfare state pertains only to those who cannot help themselves. As the extent of the welfare measures is dependent on the capacities of the state and its citizens, the help must be offered according to the urgency of needs, so that the more pressing needs are given priority over the less pressing needs. One of the aims of the welfare measures must be to end dependence on and the need for assistance and to restore or enable autonomy as far as possible. This aim is required by the dignity of the beneficiaries of the help.

And, fifth, the welfare state has the task not only to provide help when help is needed, but also to assure its citizens that certain existential risks are covered by society. An important consequence of this is the elimination of fear, which may contribute to the citizens' ability to act with confidence. But, as with any insurance, such societal guarantees are confronted with moral hazard problems such as a lack of precaution and increased risk-taking on the part of the individual. There is the well-known problem that the benefits of the welfare state will influence and distort the incentives of agents and will create opportunities for misuse. On the one hand, it is important to limit the distortions of incentives and the possibilities of misuse in order to protect the welfare state. On the other hand, it is important to make sure that those countermeasures do not deprive those in need of the necessary assistance. In order to avoid this, probably some misuse has to be tolerated.

The preceding remarks are not meant as an unqualified justification of the existing forms of the welfare state in industrialized countries which are confronted with the problems of financing welfare benefits in the face of soaring healthcare costs and their aging populations. Instead, they try to provide criteria for the assessment of existing states and welfare states. For the latter, it will probably be the case that, to different degrees, they both withhold normatively required benefits and provide benefits which are not justifiable. With regard to the pressing financial shortages, the task of setting the right priorities is most pertinent. In this context, probably one of the most pressing tasks is to distinguish between those forms of healthcare the inhabitants of a country have a right to and those to which they don't have a right. The justification of general criteria does not render the meticulous and patient study of complex normative questions unnecessary. It can only supply some of the necessary normative instruments for conducting those studies.

#### **References**

- Gewirth, A. 1978. *Reason and Morality*: University of Chicago Press 1981. 'Are There Any Absolute Rights?', *Philosophical Quarterly* 31: 1–16
	- 1982. 'There Are Absolute Rights', *Philosophical Quarterly* 32: 348–53
- Keyssar, A. 1986. *Out of Work: The First Century of Unemployment in Massachusetts*. Cambridge University Press
- Levinson, J. 1982. 'Gewirth on Absolute Rights', *Philosophical Quarterly* 32: 73–5
- Steigleder, K. 2002. *Kants Moralphilosophie: Die Selbstbez¨uglichkeit reiner praktischer Vernunft*. Stuttgart: Metzler Verlag
- Thomson, J. J. 1986. *Rights, Restitution, and Risk: Essays in Moral Theory*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press