# Human dignity in the Jewish tradition

YAIR LORBERBAUM

The Hebrew counterpart to the expression 'human dignity' – *kevod ha-adam* – hardly exists in classical Jewish sources. This expression entered the Hebrew language and Jewish-Israeli culture in modern times due to the influence of modern European structures of thought. Thus, for example, Israel's Basic Law: Human Dignity (*kevod ha-adam*) and Freedom (*ve-heruto*) was enacted by the Israeli parliament (Knesset) in 1992.

The term '*kavod*' appears in the Hebrew Bible several hundred times, and even more so in Talmudic literature. Its root is probably in the word '*kaved*', 'heavy', which also means substance (or concrete/physical presence). The core meaning of the term '*kavod*' is social honour or dignity, but it may also mean wealth, glory, greatness and splendour. Thus, the Hebrew Bible uses it to signify God's presence or substance (*kevod YHWH*, for example Exodus 16:7), or there are such Rabbinic sayings as: 'All that God created in His world He did not create but for His own glory (*li-khevodo*)' (*m. Avot* 6:11).

In classical Judaism, from early Rabbinic literature on, one finds the expression '*kevod ha-beriyot*', denoting the honour or dignity of people (literally, creatures). Like the term '*kavod*', the expression '*kevod ha-beriyot*' sometimes means the intrinsic value of each and every human being (i.e. dignity), but in many cases it connotes an acquired social or political status (i.e. honour). Though the latter is defended in some halakhic rules (see for example *b. Bava Metsi'a* 30a), there were Talmudic sages who rejected it as a worthy personal goal. Thus, for example, R. Eli'ezer ha-Kappar says: 'Jealousy, lust, and honour (*kavod*) remove a person from the world' (*m. Avot* 4:21). The rejection of *kavod* as social status is sometimes contrasted to the honour due to God: ' . . . for how long do you put aside the honour of God and occupy yourselves with the honour of human beings' (*b. Kid* 32b).1

*Kavod* in the sense of dignity is probably best conveyed in the saying: 'So great is the dignity of creatures (*kevod ha-beriyot*) that it displaces a prohibition of the Torah' (*b. Ber* 19b). Though this saying seems to attribute significant

<sup>1</sup> Ironically, this saying is brought into the Talmudic discussion so as to argue that God's honour is to serve human beings.

weight to human dignity, it was narrowed, limited and almost neglected by later halakhists (both amoraic and medieval) (Blidstein 1982–3: 9–10).2

In classical Judaism, the intrinsic-universal value of human beings – i.e. what is referred to today by the term 'human dignity' – is embedded in the biblical notion of man being created in God's image (hereinafter, the Hebrew phrase *Tzelem Elohim*, simply *Tzelem* or *Imago Dei*). *Imago Dei* is a central notion in the Jewish Tradition. Its point of departure is the first chapter of the Hebrew Bible which, in the account of the Creation, brings together God the Creator and humankind. Though it seems to almost disappear from the subsequent chapters and books of the Hebrew Biblical corpus, it re-emerges with great force in the first and formative layer of classical Rabbinic literature in the homilies of the *tanna'im* (Jewish Palestinian Sages, first to third centuries CE). The idea of *Tzelem Elohim* emerged once again and with great force in the High Middle Ages, both in Jewish philosophy and in early Kabbalah (Jewish mysticism). From then on, at least in the realm of Kabbalah, it has always remained a central doctrine.

The importance of *Imago Dei* within classical Judaism is due, not only to its centrality as a theological conception, but also to its normative-legal (i.e. halakhic) implications and ramifications, particularly in its formative stage of early Rabbinic literature. The notion of *Tzelem Elohim* was reinterpreted in almost every period of the Jewish tradition. Due to limitations of space, I shall confine myself here to four literary corpora: the Book of Genesis, Talmudic literature, the writings of Maimonides and those of Nahmanides.

The Bible and the Talmud are the canonical texts of Jewish tradition. Biblical literature is the point of departure for every later layer in the Jewish tradition; while tannaitic literature is the first and formative layer of Talmudic literature. Both intertwine legal (halakhic) and non-legal ('aggadic' – i.e. narrative, vision, poetic) material. Maimonides is well known both for his famous philosophical treatise, *The Guide of the Perplexed*, the most important and influential philosophical treatise in the Jewish tradition, and for his legal code, *Mishneh Torah*, a seminal work in halakhah. Nahmanides, a prominent Jewish scholar of the Middle Ages, is known as both a central figure in early Kabbalah and as an innovative interpreter of the Pentateuch and the Babylonian Talmud.3

The most striking and fundamental element in the account of Creation in the first chapter of Genesis is the creation of man in God's image and likeness. Genesis 1: 26–7 states: 'And God said, "Let Us make man in our image, after Our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth and over every creeping

<sup>2</sup> For a contemporary effort to make *kevod haberiyot* a central halakhic principle, see Sperber 2007.

<sup>3</sup> Among Nahmanides' writings are his interpretation of the Pentateuch, in which he incorporated enigmatic yet highly influential Kabbalistic allusions, as well as treatises and homilies that combine theology, Kabbalah and Halakhah.

thing that creepeth upon the earth".' The creation of humanity in the opening chapter of the Hebrew Bible consists of four closely intertwined elements: image and likeness; dominion; male and female; procreation. The first element governs them all. The synonyms 'image' (*Tzelem*) and 'likeness' (*demut*) entail presence: human beings are God's icons, hence the latter is present in the former in a way similar to that in which the gods, in ancient times, were believed to dwell in their statues and images. According to Genesis 1:26–8, human beings represent God not in one quality alone (for example, their intellect); the *Tzelem* rather encompasses all their features, both corporeal and mental. As extensions of the divine, human beings are granted authority and dominion over Creation. In order to govern the Earth they need to procreate; therefore they were created male and female, blessed by God, and thus they multiply the divine image.4

The biblical view regarding the notion of *Tzelem Elohim* originated in the ancient Near East, *inter alia* in sources relating to the status of the monarch, in Mesopotamia and in Egypt.5 Mesopotamian sources identify the king and his offspring alone as being made in the image of God; hence his authority to rule. In contrast, Genesis 1:26–8 emphasize that man – every man – is made in the image of God (Loewenstamm 1958: 798). As Moshe Weinfeld wrote: 'In Israel there was a democratization of an idea that had previously been applied to the king alone' (1968: 114).6 This ancient Near-Eastern royal theology, which provided the basis for the 'metaphysical'–political status of the king (whose core lasted into early modernity), is transformed in the opening chapter of the Hebrew Bible to 'the glory of the human race' (Loewenstamm 1958: 798).

The biblical *Tzelem* theology, or rather anthropology, has legal-normative implications. Thus, as stated in Genesis 9:6: 'Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made He man.' Genesis 9:6 stands at the heart of the covenant concluded between God and Noah after the flood, a covenant which structures the post-diluvian world. This verse provides the basis for Biblical criminal law. As Moshe Greenberg noted:

That man was made in the image of God is expressive of the peculiar and supreme worth of man. This view of the uniqueness and supremacy of human life has yet another consequence. It places life beyond the reach of other values. The idea that life may be measured in terms of money or other property and *a fortiori* the idea that persons may be evaluated as equivalences of other persons, is excluded . . . The guilt of the murderer is infinite because the murdered life is invaluable. An absolute wrong has been committed, a sin against God which is not subject to human discussion. (Greenberg 1960: 15–16)

If, as the Book of Genesis teaches, human life is infinitely valuable, then the practical-legal consequence of this conception is that a murderer must be

<sup>4</sup> See also Genesis 5:1–3.

<sup>5</sup> An echo of the view that the Mesopotamian king is divine appears in the harsh polemics directed against the Babylonian king in Isaiah 14:13–14; cf. Psalm 89: 7.

<sup>6</sup> Cf. Westermann 1994.

put to death. This legislation is not grounded exclusively in considerations of deterrence which might be overridden by other, economic or utilitarian considerations – as was indeed the case in most ancient Near-Eastern codes of law. In cases of murder, for example, these codes sometimes granted discretion to the victim's family to substitute capital punishment with pecuniary compensation. The verse in Genesis 9:6 thus gives concrete normative expression to the concept of the immeasurable value of human life. Given that human life cannot be quantified, only the ultimate punishment – death – is commensurate for he who takes a life away.

Furthermore, as mentioned above, *Imago Dei* implies the rejection of royal theology. If not only the king, but the entire human race is made in the image of God, the ground is pulled out from the basis upon which royal theology, or more broadly political authority, rests. It is no longer possible to base the authority of the king on any special relationship with God as this relationship is the heritage of every human being. Thus, political authority must rest on a different approach. Hence Deuteronomy 17 places limitations upon the king's powers, creating a scheme of separation of political powers (*ibid*.: 18).7

The *Tzelem* theology occupied a central place in early Rabbinic literature. In Talmudic literature, the biblical notion of *Imago Dei* was given a strongly iconic interpretation. God's icons are His dwelling in the mundane realm. According to this structure of thought, the creation as a whole is instrumental for the creation of man. In light of the conception of image as presence, the creation of man in tannaitic literature is perceived as 'the need' of the divine. God's desire to expand Himself motivated Him to create humanity in His own 'image and likeness' ('for His own glory').

The Talmudic idea that God is immanent in humanity has far-reaching normative-legal ramifications. Among the laws that were designed by the early rabbis (*tanna'im*) in light of the *Tzelem* theology are the rules for criminal procedure, including the forms of execution; a genuine and bold approach to capital punishment; the replacement of the biblical *lex talionis* (an eye for an eye) by pecuniary compensation; and the laws concerning procreation.

Some examples: the forms of execution in Talmudic law – stoning, burning, strangling and hanging8 – were conceived by the early rabbis in a way which refrains from harming the condemned person's body. This becomes clear when one compares the forms of execution described in the Mishnah and other related tannaitic sources to those mentioned in the Bible and in post-Biblical Jewish and foreign sources of antiquity and late antiquity. Almost all the methods of execution mentioned in the latter insist on crushing the body, and tearing or consuming its limbs. By contrast, in the forms of execution mentioned in the Talmudic sources, the court simulates what they perceive as 'death at the hands

<sup>7</sup> Cf. Lorberbaum 2011: 26–37, 144–55.

<sup>8</sup> *m. San*. 6:1–3. Hanging, according to Talmudic literature, is performed in addition to some executions by stoning.

of Heaven'. According to the early rabbis, when God kills or causes the death of a sinner, he refrains from harming his body (*b. San* 46b). 'Death by Heaven', they stated, 'leaves no impression' (i.e. mark on the body). Why? It would seem that this is because God does not want to harm His image. Hence the court, for the same theological reason, imitates God and executes the condemned while keeping his body intact.

The application of *Tzelem* theology in Talmudic criminal procedure is not confined to the forms of execution and to the human body; it results in capital punishment as such, i.e. to the living human being. In light of their notion of image as presence, they considered bloodshed as harm to God. Rabbi Akiva taught: 'He who sheds blood is regarded as though he had impaired [literally, nullified or reduced] the likeness (*ha-demut* [of God]). What is the proof? "He who sheds man's blood . . . " Why? "For he made man in the Image of God"' (Genesis 9:6).9 The iconic view of *Tzelem Elohim* conveyed here and in many other Talmudic sources led R. Akiva and other rabbis to describe murder, not only as an extreme moral transgression, but also as the ultimate religious sin; it diminishes the Divine image. Capital punishment, even when implemented by a legitimate court, is perceived as a form of murder. Hence the execution of a sinner, even a murderer, diminishes God's image. This line of thought led Rabbi Akiva and other rabbis (in the mid-second century CE) to abolish capital punishment in practice. In the first chapter of the mishnaic tractate *Makkot*, at the very end of the tannaitic discussions of criminal procedure, we find the following striking statement: 'Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva said: If we sat in the Sanhedrin no man would ever be executed' (*m. Mak*. 1.11). The reason for their opposition to killing by the court is not given in the Mishnah, but it is clear from numerous other Talmudic sources that in their view all forms of killing, even execution of transgressors by courts, are a diminution of God's image, and therefore should not be exercised. The legal technique used by the early rabbis to undermine executions was an array of procedural obstacles that made conviction highly unlikely, if not impossible.10

When compared to its Biblical counterpart, that enumerates numerous transgressions deserving capital punishment, especially in the case of murder, this conclusion might seem surprising. Nevertheless, early Rabbinic halakhah portrays itself as drawing the logical conclusion from Genesis 9:6, which explains

- 9 *Gen. Rab*. 34.14 (Theodor-Albeck edition, 326).
- 10 Among these hindrances are: punctilious methods of examining witnesses; the rules that circumstantial evidence, confessions and self-incriminations are inadmissible; blanket rules concerning the disqualification of witnesses ('just as with two witnesses, if one of them is a relative or disqualified, their entire testimony is invalid'); the rule that the accused must be admonished by the witnesses prior to the commission of the offence; etc. Probably the most impressive collection of sayings and homilies that convey the intrinsic value of human life, together with the values of equality and individuality, is in *Mishnah Sanhedrin* 4.5, in the admonition of the witnesses in capital cases.

the decree to execute the murderer on the basis that man is created in the image of God. This reasoning seems paradoxical: is not the murderer likewise created in the image of God? Does not execution itself diminish the image? This line of thought, though resulting in a diametrically opposite conclusion, is founded on Biblical theology. It is viewed as the final conclusion embedded in Biblical theology itself.

The Talmudic *Tzelem* theology underlies the commandment to procreate and multiply as well. If the main purpose of the above-discussed laws was to protect God by preserving His image, the aim of this commandment is to expand and augment Him by duplicating his image. This notion is manifested in many Talmudic sources, such as the following:

R. Eleazar b. Azariah taught: He who refrains from procreation is as though he impaired [God's] image. What is the proof? 'For in the Image of God made He man', followed by 'And you should be fruitful and multiply'. (Gen. 9:7) Ben Azzai taught: he who refrains from procreation is as if he shed blood and impaired [God's] image. What is the proof? 'He who sheds man's blood' etc. Why? 'For in the Image of God made He man', followed by: 'and you shall be fruitful and multiply'.11

Following Rabbi Akiva's saying quoted earlier, Rabbi Eleazar b. Azariah maintains that *Imago Dei* mentioned in Genesis 9:6 refers not only to murder, but also governs the reference to procreation in the following verse (9:7). As if to say: murder and procreation are two sides of the same coin; the former diminishes the image of God while the latter expands it. Ben Azzai strengthens R. Eleazar's suggestion by attributing the same moral and legal status to the commandment of procreation and the prohibition of murder. No wonder procreation became a prominent commandment in rabbinic halakhah – it represents the final, practical conclusion of the *Tzelem* theology.12

Maimonides, the great medieval halakhist and philosopher, had a radically different conception and interpretation of *Imago Dei*. Ignoring the Talmudic treatment of *Tzelem Elohim*, Maimonides subjected this Biblical idea to the allegorical method of interpretation and interpreted it in light of the Aristotelian philosophy of his time. Maimonides removed all anthropomorphic attributes from God. Hence, he rejected any concrete meaning of the Hebrew term *Tzelem Elohim*, identifying it instead with the intellect. At the very beginning of *The Guide of the Perplexed* (I:1), Maimonides writes:

11 *Gen. Rab*. 34.1 (Theodor-Albeck, 326), cf. *b. Yeb*. 63b.

12 For a comprehensive discussion of the Talmudic understanding of Imago Dei, see Lorberbaum 2004. Of course, against this universalistic approach based on the Z*elem* theology, one could find in classical Judaism (as in many other religious traditions) – in Talmudic Literature and especially in Kabbalah – particularistic approaches, that distinguish between Jews and gentiles. Yet it is not of my concern here to juxtapose these contradicting trends. My purpose in this chapter is to describe the universalistic view.

The term *Tzelem* [image] . . . is applied to the natural form, I mean to the notion in virtue of which a thing is constituted as a substance and becomes what it is. It is the true reality of the thing . . . In man that notion is that form which human apprehension derives. It is on account of this intellectual apprehension that it is said of man: *In the Image of God created He him* . . . not their shape and configuration. (Maimonides 1963: 22)

For Maimonides, *Tzelem Elohim* is not the intellect as human potential but the intellect *in actu*. Only one whose intellect is 'in his most perfect and excellent state' is in God's image. In other words, only those who reach the highest levels of philosophical apprehension are for Maimonides in the image of God. Unlike the early rabbis, who believed that everyone is born in the image of God, Maimonides thought that the overwhelming majority of human beings are not in God's likeness.

Maimonides' intellectual conception of *Tzelem Elohim* carries legal-halakhic implications. Unlike Rabbi Akiva and his school, Maimonides approved of capital punishment, considering it a vital device for achieving law and order in society. The transgressor's deed, he argues, is an obvious proof that he is not in God's image. Maimonides developed an alternative criminal procedure, administered by the king. Unlike the criminal procedure of Mishnah Sanhedrin, this procedure enables the monarch to find a murderer guilty and execute him. Unlike the early Rabbinic halakhah, which strives to save from execution not only the innocent but also those who are guilty, Maimonides creates a procedure that could end up with finding a murderer guilty.

Furthermore, Maimonides argued for a sharp contrast between intellectual perfection (i.e.*Imago Dei*), on the one hand, and procreation, that entails sexual lust and the burden of supporting a family and raising children, on the other. The human *telos* – intellectual perfection – can be fully achieved only through the lifestyle of *vita contemplativa*. In contrast to the Talmud, which was committed to family values (seeing marriage and procreation as religious imperatives), Maimonides recommended (albeit only for the few) the ideal of philosophical contemplation, which entails freedom from the burdens of everyday life. Hence, unlike the Talmudic halakhah, Maimonides exempted those whose 'soul desires the Torah' – the few who realize their intellectual perfection (i.e. engage in philosophy, namely, the knowledge of God) – from marriage and procreation.13

Unlike Maimonides, Nahmanides followed the Talmud on *Tzelem Elohim*, while infusing it with the thought-structure and language of Kabbalah. Nahmanides locates the source of the human soul in the Divine–sefirotic realm of the Godhead. Its root is in the *sefirah* of *Binah*, from which it emanates 'down' to the mundane realm, to the human body (cf. Nahmanides 1976; Lorberbaum 2000). The *Sefirot*, according to many Kabbalists, Nahmanides included, are organized in a human shape. The divine soul is thus drawn down to the human

<sup>13</sup> *Mishneh Torah*, *Hilkhot Ishut* 15.1. For a full analysis of Maimonides' approach to Imago Dei, see Lorberbaum 1999; 2001.

body, according to Nahmanides, because of the isomorphism between its shape and the structure of the divine realm. It is this figurative resemblance that extends the 'Divine dwelling' to humanity.

Though Nahmanides is extremely esoteric on Kabbalistic matters, his scattered hints create the impression that his *kabbalah* (literally, tradition) on *Tzelem Elohim* is based on an iconic conception of the 'image' relation.14 The *Tzelem* theology, according to Nahmanides, is 'a deep secret'. It (the *Tzelem*, i.e. humanity) was created 'for a great need and honourable aim'. Following the Talmudic tradition, Nahmanides maintains that God 'desires its existence' [i.e. of man, who is in his image] because it enables his enlargement and augmentation. Against the inclination of the soul (according to the Neoplatonic principle of *reversio*) to return to its source in the 'upper world' (the *sefirot*), it is drawn to the mundane realm, to its 'counterpart' in the human body. Hence human existence in the mundane realm is the need of God in heaven (*tzorech gavoha*). Thus, the commandments, according to Nahmanides, have a theurgic purpose – they 'repair' and enhance the divine realm. *Tzelem Elohim* became constitutive in Kabbalah in almost all its circles and trends through the ages. By and large, Nahmanides' view on *Tzelem Elohim* is an adequate representative of this tradition.

The modern notion of human dignity is embedded in the thought-structure of *Tzelem Elohim* in classical Judaism. Unlike religious worldviews that transcend God by emphasizing man's lowliness and vanity, the *Tzelem* theology 'utilizes' God and the notion of image as presence to empower humanity, and eventually to empower the divinity itself. It may be that, from a modern perspective, the intrinsic value attributed to humanity by the *Tzelem* theology is too strong. In the first chapters of the book of Genesis (i.e.1, 5 and 9), and to a greater extent in late antiquity Talmudic literature, *Tzelem Elohim* received an iconic interpretation, elevating humanity to a quasi-divine status. Maimonides deviated dramatically from this line of thought, which reached its peak in the High Middle Ages in numerous Kabbalistic circles, a tradition that continued to early modernity. The *Tzelem* theology, in most of its transformations, had normative-legal ramifications. The theurgic meaning attributed to the commandments by Talmudic literature, and to a greater extent by Kabbalah, based on this theology, seem alien to the norms derived from contemporary understandings of the concept of human dignity. It is nevertheless difficult to imagine a structure of thought (religious or secular) that ascribes such power and status to humanity. Some of the early rabbis and most of the Kabbalists viewed the daily, mundane commandments as fixing the divine Godhead. Closer to modern, normative applications of the concept of human dignity are the legal expressions of the *Tzelem* theology in the Bible, and particularly in Talmudic literature. To be sure, Talmudic literature did not derive human rights and freedoms in the modern sense from the notion of *Imago Dei*. Nevertheless, some

14 See, for example *Sha'ar ha-Gemul*, in *Nahmanides' Writings*, in Chavel 1981: 305.

of the Talmudic laws are closely connected to the latter: thus, for example the biblical and Talmudic rules limiting the power of the monarch (and any other sovereign) and creating a structure of separation of political powers. Though the duty to procreate is not conceived as stemming from the modern concept of human dignity (should it not?), the abolition of capital punishment is closely connected to it. While we do not share the theological premises of R. Akiva (his bold anthropomorphism, the notion of image as presence, and so on), his homilies on *Tzelem Elohim* may be viewed as a mythic-symbolic source for the modern belief in the 'sanctity of life', which is the basis for the contemporary critique of capital punishment and for human rights in general.15

The book of Genesis and R. Akiva's *Tzelem Elohim* theology elevated humanity to the level of a divine image, thereby constituting the notion of the 'sanctity of life'. 'Sanctity' is first and foremost a religious concept, attributed to divinity. The *Tzelem* theology facilitated its attribution also to human beings. Roman *dignitas*, interpreted by Cicero as the intrinsic value of human beings, did not have this status and power. It would seem that, once the notion of the 'sanctity of life' was made available in the Western tradition, it became a constitutive idea, even when the theological scaffold on which it was first erected had long since been removed and forgotten.

#### **References**

- Blidstein, G. I.1982–3. '"Great Is Human Dignity" The Peregrination of a Law', *Shenatom Ha-Mishpat Ha-Ivri* 9–10: 127–86 (Hebrew)
Chavel, H. (ed.). 1981. *Nahmanides' Writings*, vol. II. Jerusalem: Mossad Ha-Rav Kook

- Greenberg, M. 1960. 'Some Postulates of Biblical Criminal Law', in *Yehezkel Kaufmann Jubilee Volume*, ed. M. Haran. Jerusalem: Magness Press, 5–28
- Loewenstamm, S. A. 1958. 'Beloved Is Man Who Was Created in the Image', *Tarbiz* 17: 798 (Hebrew)
- Lorberbaum, Y. 1999. 'Maimonides on Imago Dei: Philosophy and Law The Case of Murder, Capital Punishment and Criminal Procedure', *Tarbiz* 68: 533–56 (Hebrew)
	- 2000. 'Nahmanides' Kabbalistic Conception of "Tzelem Elohim"', *Kabbalah, Journal for the Study of Jewish Mystical Texts* 5: 287–326 (Hebrew)
	- 2001. 'Humans Created in the Image of God and the Commandments to Procreate in the Talmud and Maimonides', *Iyyunei Mishpat* 16: 695–754 (Hebrew)
	- 2004.*Tzelem Elohim Halakhah and Aggadah*. Tel Aviv, Jerusalem: Schocken (Hebrew) 2011. *Disempowered King, Monarchy in Classical Judaism*. London, New York: Continuum
- 15 It is worth noting that, in the early 1950s, immediately after the establishment of the State of Israel, the Knesset – explicitly inspired by *m. Mak*.1.10 and R. Akiva's sayings – abolished capital punishment (inherited from British Mandate law) in virtually all criminal cases. The legislation was supported by almost all parties, including the secular majority, and since then has never been changed.
- Maimonides. 1963. *The Guide of the Perplexed*, trans. Shlomo Pines. Chicago University Press
- Nahmanides. 1976. *Commentary to the Torah*, trans. H. Chavel, vol. I. New York: Shilo, 66
- Sperber, D. 2007. *The Path of Halacha*. Jerusalem: Reuven Mass (Hebrew)
- Weinfeld, M. 1968. 'God the Creator in Gen. 1 and in the Prophecy of the Second Isaiah', *Tarbiz* 37: 105–32 (Hebrew)
- Westermann, C. 1992. *Genesis 1–11: A Continental Commentary*. Minneapolis, MN: Augsburg

**Part II** Beyond the scope of the European tradition