### Dignity only for humans? A controversy ROBERT HEEGER

#### **A critical comment on the ascription of dignity to non-human living beings**

Should dignity be ascribed only to humans or also to non-human living beings? We are faced with this problem if we take note of a recent bioethical discussion about the 'dignity of creatures'. This discussion was prompted by an amendment to the Swiss Federal Constitution. A plebiscite of May 1992 had voted into the Constitution that the federal government in its regulations of gene technologies shall take into account the dignity of non-human creatures, that is: of animals, plants and other organisms. The vote for the demand that the dignity of these creatures be taken into account indicates that wide sections of the Swiss population worried about moral problems caused by genetic engineering – in short: whether human beings have a moral obligation to set limits to their interference with the life of animals, plants and other organisms, and, if so, which limits should be set. Hitherto used moral criteria, such as the avoidance of pain and suffering in animals, were thought insufficient for tackling these problems. A more far-reaching criterion was deemed necessary in order to include moral concerns beyond animal pain and suffering. But the fierce debate following the plebiscite showed that it is far from clear what moral content the concept of dignity of non-human creatures should be taken to have. The Swiss authorities commissioned two teams to clarify the concept and to explore its implications for the genetic engineering of non-human creatures. The reports of the teams give expression to two interpretations of the concept that were prevailing in the discussion (Schmidt 2008: 196). The first report (Praetorius and Saladin 1996) tries to determine a concept of dignity of non-human creatures by analogy with a Kantian concept of human dignity. The second report (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998) suggests that the concept should be seen as corresponding with the concept of inherent value of non-human beings. I will describe both interpretations and criticize them for what I take to be their problematic features. Finally, I will raise the question of whether we should ascribe dignity to all living beings or only to human persons, bearing in mind the role of the concept of dignity as a ground for human rights.

#### **Dignity of creatures as an extension of human dignity**

According to the first report, the concept of dignity of creatures is akin to the concept of human dignity. Its meaning should be clarified by starting out from the concept of human dignity. To respect human dignity means to assume that every human being has intrinsic value and must be taken into account regardless of the cost, and to have dignity means to be in the world for the sake of oneself and not for the purposes of others (Praetorius and Saladin 1996: 20, 29). In this interpretation, the Kantian idea of the human being as an end in itself and a bearer of absolute intrinsic value is discernible. However, in contrast to Kant, the report widens the application of the concept of dignity. Dignity extends to non-human creatures. This gives rise to the question what content the concept of dignity has if it is said to be applicable to both human beings and non-human creatures. The answer of the report is this: first, the concept of dignity of creatures cannot have exactly the same meaning as the concept of human dignity, due to the significant role *reason* plays in the conceptualization of human dignity. But, second, both concepts have a core meaning in common. This core meaning is the specific intrinsic value of a being, its 'integrity' (Praetorius and Saladin 1996: 86). Human beings and non-human creatures have this feature in common, because both are organic wholes that can make their needs or wishes understood by human beings (Praetorius and Saladin 1996: 36). Since both concepts share this core meaning, the concept of dignity of non-human creatures should get an interpretation that leans on the concept of human dignity. It should be taken to mean the specific intrinsic value of non-human creatures to which we owe respect (Praetorius and Saladin 1996: 87).

The report also deals with the question what implications the concept of dignity has for the genetic engineering of non-human creatures. The demand that the dignity of non-human creatures be taken into account should lead to a new perception of other living beings – with far-reaching practical consequences regarding, for instance, the treatment of animals. To treat animals solely as means to achieve human ends is to grossly disregard their intrinsic value. To subject them to genetic engineering for human purposes is to make them serve better as objects for human use (Praetorius and Saladin 1996: 93). Such serious interferences with their lives are in principle morally inadmissible. They can only be justified if human life would otherwise be threatened (Praetorius and Saladin 1996: 44).

This interpretation of the concept of dignity of non-human creatures is problematic. It starts out from a Kantian concept of human dignity and tries to extend it to non-human creatures. It implies that there is an analogy between human dignity and the dignity of non-human creatures. The dignity it ascribes to these creatures is supposed to give them inviolability similar to human inviolability. However, the report fails to justify the stated analogy. It omits the important question whether non-human creatures meet the prerequisite conditions of the ascription of dignity. According to a Kantian concept, persons have dignity in virtue of their autonomy, that is, in virtue of their ability to exert self-determination, to be moral agents. This self-determination requires minimally that persons can transcend immediate urges and everyday needs and can reflectively evaluate their own and others' wishes, needs and interests. But as far as we know, non-human creatures cannot acquire this capacity. Therefore, a Kantian concept of dignity cannot be extended to non-human creatures.

#### **Dignity of creatures as inherent value**

The second report argues that the concept of dignity of non-human creatures should not be seen as an extension of the concept of human dignity. One important reason it gives is that the constitutional article demands to take into account the dignity of non-human creatures regardless of whether they have or lack the cognitive capacities that are prerequisites for human dignity (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 42). The report proposes an interpretation that is independent of the concept of human dignity. It says, instead, that the concept of dignity in the constitutional article corresponds with the concept of inherent value (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 42–8). What its concept of inherent value comprises can be explained by considering two questions. First, why should inherent value be ascribed to non-human creatures? Second, what moral content does the ascription of inherent value have?

In answer to the first question, the report states that inherent value should be ascribed to non-human creatures because they can be said to have three characteristics. First, they have a good of their own. Second, they pursue individual goals, they have their own ends, strive to survive, adapt to their environment and reproduce. Third, they are organic entities; they exist as individuals (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 43–4). Most important is that they possess a good of their own. The report puts in more concrete terms what this good consists in with regard to genetic engineering. It is neither an original purpose of the species nor the integrity of the genome, but the uninhibited development of those functions and abilities that members of the respective species, as a rule, can develop (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998:52–7). So, whether or not the own good of non-human creatures is impaired by genetic engineering should be determined in view of (expected or empirically demonstrated) phenotypes of the transgenic animals or plants, for example, the transgenic animals' ability to grow, procreate or move. The report also provides an answer to the question regarding the moral content of the ascription of inherent value: that a non-human creature has inherent value implies that human beings must take it into account for its own sake, show it moral respect for its own good. From the ascription of inherent value the report draws the moral conclusion that it is *prima facie* wrong to impair those functions and abilities of a non-human creature that members of its species can normally develop. This conclusion is in turn decisive for the report's moral assessment of genetic engineering: if genetic interventions impair the normal functions and abilities, then they are *prima facie* wrong, that is to say, they are morally inadmissible, unless they can be justified by other morally relevant reasons (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 15, 57–8).

There is reason to challenge this answer. It is doubtful whether the concept of inherent value does have the stated moral content, for the report's term 'inherent value' is ambiguous. It seems to stand for two different concepts of inherent value. One concept has a directly obligating character. To state that a living being has inherent value is to raise a moral claim. The report says, for instance: all living beings have inherent value and that means that we should not see them only as means, but recognize them as beings with their own good (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 48, 50). This concept of inherent value is egalitarian and resembles the concept of inherent worth set forth, for example, in Taylor's theory of environmental ethics (Taylor 1986: 75–80, 156–8). However, in several important passages the report does not hold to this concept, but gives preference to a different one: an inherent value is a value that admits of degrees and can be weighed against the value of other goods. Living beings can have a higher or lower inherent value and their value is proportionate to their complexity and abilities (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 49–50). This implies that living beings can differ in value as judged against a standard of value. Certain properties inherently related to them, such as their abilities, are the objects of this valuation. That a being has 'inherent value', then, means that it is valuable as far as these properties are concerned. This concept of inherent value is a non-moral concept. It does not yet have the moral implication that we must take non-human creatures into account for their own sake. In order for such a moral obligation to follow, a non-moral concept of inherent value must first gain moral significance.

It may be argued that this concept too already has moral significance, since the report develops the concept of dignity of non-human creatures 'within a bio-centric framework', which is to say, by starting out from the bio-centric thesis that all living beings have to be taken into account morally (Balzer, Rippe and Schaber 1998: 38, 42, 48). However, the report does not set out how this bio-centric thesis is connected with the report's concept of a value of nonhuman creatures that allows of degrees and can be weighed against the value of other goods. It does not show why the bio-centric thesis supports the view that a standard of value be introduced in order to determine how valuable living beings are in comparison with other living beings or other goods. The report needs an argument that explains how its concept of inherent value inherits moral significance from the bio-centric thesis. On the condition that such an argument can be provided and that the bio-centric thesis is tenable, the ascription of inherent value can be said to imply that non-human creatures should be taken into account for their own sake.

#### **Should we ascribe dignity to non-human living beings?**

We have looked into two interpretations of the concept of dignity of non-human creatures. Do they give us good reason for applying the concept of dignity to non-human living beings? The first interpretation fails in this respect. It tries to ascribe dignity to non-human living beings by extending a Kantian concept of human dignity to them. But a Kantian concept of dignity cannot be extended to non-human living beings because it is tied to prerequisite conditions which, as far as we know, non-human beings cannot meet. The second interpretation does not get into these difficulties. It suggests that the ascription of dignity to non-human living beings corresponds to the ascription of inherent value, which entails the moral claim that these beings be taken into account for their own sake. However, this interpretation leaves us with a problem. It equates the ascription of inherent value with the ascription of dignity. But we may reasonably agree with the moral claim that non-human living beings be taken into account for their own sake, even though we would refuse to ascribe dignity to them. We can justify this by pointing out that there is a difference between the obligation to show consideration for a being and the obligation to respect the dignity of a being. To which beings do we have the latter obligation? That depends on the concept of dignity we have reason to advocate. The strongest candidate is the concept of the dignity of the human person. This concept plays a fundamental role in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is the dignity of the human person that is to be protected by human rights. Philosophers have tried to adumbrate the concept in its close connection to human rights. The concept has been determined as the specific value and inviolability of the human person in virtue of its normative agency. One important component of this agency is the autonomy to choose and pursue one's own conception of a worthwhile life (Griffin 2008: 33, 45, 156). This concept of dignity does not rule out moral obligations to non-human living beings, for human dignity and human rights do not cover the whole of morality. Still, the concept implies a special position of the human person and is not applicable to non-human living beings. If we stick to it, then we should not ascribe dignity to non-human living beings.

#### **References**

- Balzer, P., Rippe, K. P., and Schaber, P. 1998. *Menschenw¨urde vs W¨urde der Kreatur: Begriffsbestimmung, Gentechnik, Ethikkommissionen*. Freiburg im Breisgau, Munich: Alber Verlag
- Griffin, J. 2008. *On Human Rights*. Oxford University Press
- Praetorius, I., and Saladin, P. 1996. *Die W¨urde der Kreatur (Art. 24novies Abs.3 BV)*. Bern: BUWAL
- Schmidt, K. 2008. *Tierethische Probleme der Gentechnik: Zur moralischen Bewertung der Reduktion wesentlicher tierlicher Eigenschaften*. Paderborn: Mentis Verlag
- Taylor, P. W. 1986. *Respect for Nature: A Theory of Environmental Ethics*. Princeton University Press