### Human dignity from a legal perspective ROGER BROWNSWORD

#### **Introduction**

As the contributions to this handbook make clear, human dignity is a fundamental value in many legal systems. In both the northern and the southern hemispheres, in common law and civilian legal systems, we find that human dignity plays a prominent role. It is also a cornerstone concept of many regional and international conventions and declarations. However, the jurisprudence of human dignity betrays a familiar tension. Whereas, in some cases, human dignity is articulated and applied in a 'liberal' spirit (underpinned by an 'empowerment' conception), in others the guiding spirit is 'conservative' (underpinned by a conception of 'human dignity as constraint') (Beyleveld and Brownsword 2001). Broadly speaking, while liberals appeal to human dignity in order to protect and to extend the sphere of individual choice, conservatives appeal to human dignity in order to impose limits on what they see as the legitimate sphere of individual choice.

Introducing the legal section of the handbook, three general issues are addressed. First, there is the question of how we should view the burgeoning references to human dignity (often in conjunction with human rights) in international and regional instruments. Second, there is the question of how we should understand the role of human dignity in national legal systems. Finally, there is the question of whether positive law is enhanced by references to human dignity or whether it would be an improvement to eliminate all such legal allusions.

#### **Human dignity and human rights as universal values: from one declaration to another**

The notion of human dignity is intimately connected to the cornerstones of modern human rights thinking – that is, to the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) of 1948, together with its two partner Covenants, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, both of 1966. In the Preamble to each of these instruments, we read that 'recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world'; and Article 1 of the UDHR famously proclaims that 'All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.'

In the early years of the present century, in the particular context of 'medicine, [the] life sciences and associated technologies', UNESCO has made a comparable attempt to underline the centrality of respect for human rights and human dignity. Notably, the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights, 2005, is peppered with references to human dignity. For example, Article 2(d) states that one of the aims of the Declaration is to recognize 'the importance of freedom of scientific research and the benefits derived from scientific and technological developments, while stressing the need for such research and development to . . . respect human dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms'.

We find a similar story in Europe, where the Council of Europe copied across the spirit, if not quite the letter, of the UDHR in the European Convention on Human Rights, 1950 (ECHR). Even the European Community, with its constitutive *economic* objectives, has recognized the binding nature of the Convention rights. Indeed, after the Treaty of Lisbon, Article 2 of the (amended) Treaty on the European Union provides that the EU 'is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights'. Moreover, Article 6(1) of the Treaty now accords to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union – a Charter that is founded on the indivisible and universal values of human dignity, freedom, equality and solidarity – the same legally binding status as the Treaties.

On the face of it, these affirmations and reaffirmations of respect for human rights and human dignity testify to a consolidation of the project started by the United Nations – in particular, they testify to human rights and human dignity being universally supported as fundamental values for the conduct of public life as well as for the governance of science, medicine and technological development. However, although the rhetoric of human rights and human dignity commands widespread support, the liberal thinking that underlies the UDHR and the ECHR is rather different to the conservative ethic that underlies both the UNESCO Declaration and the Council of Europe's Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, 1996.

#### The Universal Declaration of Human Rights

According to the distinguished judge and jurist, Michael Kirby, the purpose of the UN Charter (1945) in conjunction with the UDHR was 'to design a new world order for the safety of humanity, the more equitable sharing of its wealth and the defence of fundamental rights' (Kirby 2010: 789). Specifically, the UDHR reflected the efforts that had been made in some countries to 'express universal values that attach to being a member of the community' (Kirby *ibid*.). In other words, the principal purpose of the UDHR was to put down a nonnegotiable marker against the denial of human dignity. From the Declaration onwards, governments should not be permitted to say to any human being, 'you do not count, you have no value as an individual'. This did not require a deep philosophical justification; and it was a cosmopolitan principle that applied to all humans in their dealings with governments. Quite simply, humans have a dignity – a dignity that governments should always respect.

Having placed their preambular markers in support of 'the inherent dignity . . . of all members of the human family', it was not necessary for the Declaration or its partner Covenants to make repeated references to human dignity. Indeed, in the UDHR, after the proclamation in Article 1, there are only two further explicit references to human dignity – first, in Article 22 (concerning the right to social security and the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for dignity and the free development of personality), and then in Article 23(3) (concerning the right to just and favourable remuneration such as to ensure an existence worthy of human dignity). Similarly, in the Covenants, the only further references to human dignity are in Article 13 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (where it is agreed that 'education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and the sense of its dignity'), and in Article 10 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (to the effect that 'All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person').

These provisions are firmly tied to an important cluster of ideas: namely, that each and every human being has inherent *dignity*; that it is this *inherent* dignity that grounds (or accounts for) the possession of human rights; that these are *inalienable* rights; and that, because all humans have dignity, they hold these rights *equally*. So understood, human dignity is the foundation on which the superstructure of human rights is built. Given this relationship between human dignity and human rights, the primary *practical* and *political* discourse becomes that of human rights; and, while those who seek a deeper justification for human rights might need to revisit the idea of human dignity, the practical business of pressing one's interests against others (particularly against powerful states) will be conducted in terms of claimed human rights (see, for example, Kolnai 1976: 257–9; and Goodin 1981).

Accepting the preambular axioms – human dignity signifying that each human has inherent value and is worthy of respect – which particular rights are presupposed by human dignity? According to Joseph Raz (1979: 221), '[r]especting human dignity entails treating humans as persons capable of planning and plotting their future. Thus, respecting people's dignity includes respecting their autonomy, their right to control their future.' It follows that, if the capacity to control one's actions by reference to the choices one has made is the distinctive source of human worth, then to deny a human the opportunity to choose and control, whether by insult, enslavement or manipulation, is to offend against his or her dignity – it is, in fact, a double offence, a denial of rights as well as a denial of responsibility.

However, the International Bill of Rights is not limited to such offences against dignity. Rather, it is designed to specify a constellation of particular negative and positive rights that create the right kind of environment for humans to flourish. In this light, Andrew Clapham (1993: 148–9) maintains that the protection of human dignity involves (1) respect for everyone's humanity, and (2) the creation and protection of 'the conditions for everyone's self-fulfilment (or autonomy or self-realization)'. While the former is said to relate to *direct* attacks on dignity (such as killing, torture, slavery, trafficking in persons, coercion, verbal abuse, discrimination and maltreatment), the latter can be understood as relating to *indirect* attacks (such as a denial of the right to associate, to make love, to take part in social life, to express one's intellectual, artistic or cultural ideas, or to enjoy a decent standard of living and healthcare). This latter approach, Clapham points out, is picked up in Article 22 of the UDHR – and the same point could be made in respect of Article 23(3).

#### The UNESCO Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights

UNESCO has been in the vanguard of attempts to forge a worldwide bioethical consensus, publishing three major instruments, namely, the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights in 1997, the International Declaration on Human Genetic Data in 2003, and most significantly – or, at any rate, certainly most ambitiously – the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights in 2005(see, ten Have and Jean 2009). This five-part Declaration opens by speaking to its scope (namely, medicine and the life sciences) and then to its aims (particularly to ensure that developments in science and technology are compatible with respect for human dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms).

Starting in Article 3(1) with the principle that '[h]uman dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms are to be fully respected', the second and longest part of the Declaration articulates familiar principles relating to the maximization of benefit and the minimization of harm (Article 4), the importance of individual autonomy (Article 5) and consent (Article 6), and requiring respect for privacy and confidentiality (Article 9). However, not all persons are robust individualists able to look after their own interests, and the Declaration emphasizes the importance of respecting human vulnerability and integrity (Article 8), as well as setting out principles of equality (Article 10) and non-discrimination or stigmatization (qua 'violation of human dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms') (Article 11). The Declaration, too, conveys the sense of our essential connectedness (and, concomitantly, our mutual responsibilities) in a series of articles that relate to solidarity and cooperation (Article 13), social responsibility and health (Article 14), benefit-sharing (Article 15) and the protection of future generations (Article 16) and the environment (Article 17). Last but not least, in the middle of this list, we find Article 12, which underlines the 'importance of cultural diversity and pluralism' but only so long as difference is not 'invoked to infringe upon human dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms' (compare Appiah 2006).

For present purposes, we can skip over the remaining three parts of the Declaration because, to the extent that it is an ethical milestone, it is in its first two parts that its significance lies. On one reading, the different facets of human dignity are brought together in a complementary way: hence, despite its general nature, 'the idea of human dignity provides the necessary conceptual background for responding to the new concerns about respect for persons in clinical and research settings, and for humanity as a whole' (Andorno 2009: 96). However, the counter-reading is that the insistent demand that human dignity must not be compromised not only sets limits on pushing ahead with the science, it is also in tension with respect for human rights (Brownsword 2008).

#### Europe

Although the ECHR does not explicitly refer to or rely on the notion of human dignity, there is no doubt that, by implication, the European Convention on Human Rights asserts the value of respect for human dignity. Moreover, in the Strasbourg jurisprudence, it is clear that human dignity is implicated in the Convention's protective regime. For example, in the *Pretty* case, the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights affirmed that 'the very essence of the [Convention] is respect for human dignity and human freedom'.1 By and large, the terms of the Convention together with the jurisprudence of the Court stick closely to the idea of human dignity as the supportive underpinning for (autonomy-driven) human rights. Yet, in the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, Article 1 of which declares that the parties 'shall protect the dignity and identity of all human beings', the Council switches to a more conservative European bioethics.

The contrast in the thinking that underlies the two Conventions is not immediately obvious. So, in the Explanatory Report accompanying the later Convention, we read that 'human dignity . . . constitutes the essential value to be upheld [ . . . and] is at the basis of most of the values emphasized in the Convention' (paragraph 9); that all articles must be interpreted in light of the aim of the Convention – 'which is to protect human rights and dignity' (paragraph 22); and that the principle of respect for human dignity is central to Articles 15 (the general rule with regard to scientific research) (paragraph 96), 17 (protection of persons not able to consent to research) (paragraphs 106 and 111) and 21 (which provides that '[t]he human body and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to financial gain' (paragraph 131)). Additionally, the Preamble to the Protocol to the Convention dealing with the cloning of human beings tells us

<sup>1</sup> *Pretty* v. *United Kingdom* 2002-III; 35 EHRR 1, para. 65. See also *SW* v. *United Kingdom* and *CR* v. *United Kingdom* (1996) 21 EHRR 363, 402, para. 44/42.

that the Protocol is guided by the consideration that 'the instrumentalization of human beings through the deliberate creation of genetically identical human beings is contrary to human dignity and thus constitutes a misuse of biology and medicine'.

While these explanatory comments suggest a greater readiness to identify human dignity with a number of specific offences (particularly relating to the commercialization and commodification of the human body, the sanctity of human life, and so on) (see Caulfield and Brownsword 2006), this kind of tagging does not of itself indicate that a rival conception is incorporated in the Convention. Nevertheless, there are grounds for thinking that the Convention reflects more than a new fashion for drafting. In particular, human dignity is deployed not only to give protection to human life from the point of conception (including human embryos) but also to constrain actions which, although *prima facie* merely self-regarding, are judged to compromise human dignity (whether located in the actor's own person or humanity or, so to speak, in the community's collective conscience).

#### The UN declaration on human cloning

All 191 members of the United Nations agree that human reproductive cloning is incompatible with respect for human dignity; and, accordingly, they support its prohibition. However, members disagree about the ethics of so-called therapeutic cloning. In 2005, the General Assembly accepted a recommendation that members should be called on 'to prohibit all forms of human cloning inasmuch as they are incompatible with human dignity and the protection of human life'.2 This non-binding Declaration purports to cover all forms of human cloning, but its drafting allows members to persist with their different views about whether therapeutic cloning is compatible with human dignity. First, the use of the phrase 'inasmuch as' allows for both a narrow ('to the extent that') and a broad ('for the reason that') interpretation of the prohibition on human cloning. Second, and for present purposes more significantly, this ambiguity reaches through to invite reading the prohibition in line with one's favoured conception of human dignity. And, third, as pointed out by several of the members who voted against adopting the Declaration, the reference to the protection of human life begs all the difficult questions about the status of the human embryo (see, further, Brownsword 2007).

#### Taking stock

In one Declaration after another, the importance of human dignity has been affirmed. In the political arena, human dignity founds a regime of human

<sup>2</sup> Eighty-four members voted in favour of the (non-binding) UN Declaration on Human Cloning, with thirty-four against and thirty-seven abstentions (UN press release GA/10333, www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2005/ga10333.doc.htm).

rights that acknowledges that each human has a view, a voice and a value. In the modern biomedical Declarations, human dignity again underpins the idea that each human counts and should not be used merely as a research resource. However, in the more recent Declarations, human dignity also signals some limits to individual autonomy as well as the responsibilities that we have to human life in its developmental stages.

As foreshadowed in our introductory remarks, there is a fault line in the international jurisprudence of human dignity. Whereas, on the one side, we find a liberal ethic that treats human dignity as the underpinning of human rights, on the other, we have a conservative ethic holding that the fundamental duty is not to compromise human dignity (Brownsword 2003). Until this tension is resolved, we can expect international legal instruments to engage with human dignity in more than one way and to be articulated in one of three forms: first, they might follow the UDHR in adopting a particular conception of human dignity (and, concomitantly, a particular underlying ethic); or, second, they might try to conceal the tension by drafting either at a very high level of generality or in suitably vague terms; or, third, they might follow the UNESCO Universal Declaration by taking a more pluralist approach which invites different interpretations depending upon one's ethical approach.

#### **Human dignity in modern legal systems**

Turning from the international to the national scene, we find that human dignity is a key concept in many legal systems. However, the contributions to this handbook paint a picture that suggests some unevenness and unpredictability in the various appeals that are made to it and in its application. Not surprisingly, we find that the tensions already detected at the international level are replicated nationally.

There are many different ways of classifying the elements of legal systems. For present purposes, a three-level model of the ordering (or governance) of human societies will be employed. For convenience, we can term these levels: the 'constitutive', the 'public' and the 'private'. Following some clarifying remarks about this organizing scheme, we can consider how human dignity shapes features of both the public and the private order, before broaching the important question of why it is that, in some cases, human dignity underlines the importance of consent and yet, in others, repudiates it (Fletcher 1996; Beyleveld and Brownsword 2007).

#### The organizing scheme

Assuming a three-level legal ordering, the first task for a society is to declare its constitutive values. These values indicate the mission of that society, its direction and the values that set the limits to what it regards as acceptable conduct. All legal operations within a society need to be compatible with this constitutive order. When we say that human dignity is treated as a fundamental legal value, this ordinarily means that it is either itself one of the explicit constitutive values or that it is an implicit value that is the basis of, or ground for, the expressed values. Second, there is public order, giving the public life of each society its distinctive features. Broadly conceived, the public order includes the criminal justice system but also the regulation of health, education, the economy, transport, the information society and a myriad other matters. Third, there is private ordering, at which level individuals have the opportunity for self-governance. In the case of contract law, for example, it is not simply that parties may make their own trades; more significantly, it is that they may (within public policy limits which, of course, will be sensitive to the order's constitutive and public values) set their own terms of trade (Brownsword 2006).

Against this backcloth, the law operates in ways that reflect the influence of a host of credos and beliefs, or so to speak 'ideologies' (Adams and Brownsword 2006). As political institutions take greater responsibility for making the law, leaving courts to settle particular disputes and to hold government to the constitutive values of the legal order, it is surely unsurprising that particular legislative enactments reflect the political ideologies of their promoters. Nevertheless, we might expect that the constitutive values themselves are above politics and, for this reason, immune to the influence of political ideology – and, indeed, to some extent, this might be so. The fact is, however, that, in one instance after another, we see that human dignity cannot escape the influence of ideology (McCrudden 2008).

In a seminal paper, David Feldman cautioned that we should not 'assume that the idea of dignity is inextricably linked to a liberal-individualist view of human beings as people whose life-choices deserve respect' (Feldman 1999: 685). To the contrary, 'human dignity may subvert rather than enhance choice . . . Once it becomes a tool in the hands of lawmakers and judges, the concept of human dignity is a two-edged sword' (*ibid*.). Applying this insight, we can chart the application of human dignity relative to both liberal and conservative readings, the former pushing (other things being equal) for the protection and extension of the sphere of individual choice, the latter emphasizing the limits to this sphere of legitimate choice. Of course, this is a very broad-brush contrast. On the liberal side, there are important differences between, for example, consequentialist (usually utilitarian) and rights-based approaches, and between approaches that recognize only negative rights and those that recognize also positive rights; similarly, on the conservative side, there are important differences between communitarian and other duty-based approaches (Brownsword 2003); and we should not forget that there are approaches that treat human dignity as the ground not only for permitting individuals to make their own choices but also for setting limits to the sphere of free choice. However, for present purposes, the double-edged sword (albeit a relatively blunt instrument) suffices.

#### Public order

Where a legal system orients itself towards a liberal reading of human dignity, this will impact on matters of institutional design and process as well as on the substantive law. According to Green:

Principles . . . which directly or indirectly recognize and protect human dignity include: like cases must be treated alike; any curtailment of the freedom of an individual is prima facie unlawful unless justified by a positive law; a private person may do anything which is not prohibited or which does not infringe the rights of others; when it is making a decision affecting the interests of individuals a public authority is required to observe procedural fairness or natural justice and various presumptions of statutory interpretation designed to protect individual rights and freedoms. (Green 2007: 153)

Arguably, then, many of the features of the due process model of criminal justice (Packer 1969) – for example, the presumption of innocence, the right to know the reason for one's arrest, the right to legal representation, the right to remain silent, the requirement that guilt be established beyond any reasonable doubt, and so on – flow from (or, at the very least, are in line with) the liberal conception of human dignity. Similarly, for example, section 35 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa provides that the conditions of detention (of arrested, detained and accused persons) must be consistent with human dignity, including at least exercise and the provision, at state expense, of adequate accommodation, nutrition, reading material and medical treatment. In the German *Life Imprisonment* case,3 too, the Federal Constitutional Court emphasized that, even where offenders are deprived of their liberty following the commission of a crime, they do not lose their inherent dignity and, by implication, their membership of a community of rights. Elaborating on this, the Court held that cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments are strictly prohibited by the 'commandment of human dignity';4 and, in the *Honecker* decision,5 the Court suggested that human dignity is violated where an individual is 'degraded to a mere object of state action' by being kept in custody when he is seriously ill and close to death.6 Although this latter suggestion was controversial, the idea that human dignity is violated where persons are subjected to conditions that are demeaning or degrading is commonly relied on – not merely in the context of deprivation of liberty, but also in relation to housing and employment conditions.

While much of the liberal-inspired design of criminal justice is opposed to the ideology of 'crime control' (Packer1969), rather than to the conservative reading of human dignity, the latter famously opposes liberal thinking in relation to the limits to be set on individual choice. For liberals, the way in which human dignity is respected is by recognizing that individuals should be free to make their own

- 5 BerlVerfGH NJW 1993, 515. 6 *Ibid.*: 517.
<sup>3</sup> BVerfGE 45 (1977) 187. 4 *Ibid.*: 228.

choices, and act on them, unless such actions trench on the rights or freedoms of others. Against this, conservative communitarians see human dignity as a value that binds the group together by setting community-defining limits to individual freedom. So, for example, in the US case of *State* v. *Braxton*, 7 the appellate court withdrew the option of surgical castration that the trial court had offered to the convicted defendant (this being instead of a thirty-year custodial sentence). Why limit the defendant's options, and, if surgical castration is permissible in a medical context, why not in a juridical context? According to Meir Dan-Cohen (2002), the answer is that, in the latter case but not in the former, the procedure is seen as expressing an affront to human dignity. As Dan-Cohen puts it, the 'negative connotations with regard to human dignity of physical mutilation extend to even such unusual punitive circumstances as those presented by *Braxton*, but they do not extend to the very different practices of medical treatment' (Dan-Cohen 2002: 163).

The conservative dignitarian manifesto pushes for the criminalization of conduct that it regards as off limits – for example, acts that involve the commercialization or the commodification of the human body (compare the earlier analysis of the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine). However, its opposition to the liberal pro-choice view is nowhere sharper than in relation to end-of-life decisions. Here, as many have remarked, we witness an initially puzzling exchange between those would-be reformers who appeal to 'death with dignity' to argue for a permissive legal position and those who insist that the prohibitions against assisted suicide and euthanasia must be retained lest human dignity should be compromised.

Where activities need to be licensed, and where appeals to human dignity are made, it is easy to find further examples of conflict – for example, the conservative ideology failed to prevail in recent English cases concerning the licensing of research using human embryos and the tissue typing of an embryo for 'saviour sibling' purposes;8 but it was successful in the well-known (German) *Peep-Show*decision,9 where the Federal Administrative Tribunal denied a licence for a mechanical peep-show on the ground that the performance would violate human dignity. Anticipating a later point in this discussion, the Tribunal said:

The consent of the women concerned can only exclude a violation of human dignity if such a violation is based only on the lack of consent to the relevant actions or omissions of the women concerned. However, this is not the situation here because in the case at issue . . . the human dignity of the women concerned

<sup>7</sup> 326 SE 2d 410 (SC 1985).

<sup>8</sup> *R (Quintavalle on behalf of Comment on Reproductive Ethics)* v. *Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority* [2002] EWHC 2785 (Admin); [2003] EWCA 667; [2005] UKHL 28; and *R* v. *Secretary of State for Health ex parte Quintavalle (on behalf of Pro-Life Alliance)* [2001] EWHC 918 (Admin) (Crane J); [2002] EWCA Civ 29; [2003] UKHL 13.

<sup>9</sup> BVerwGE 64 (1981) 274.

is violated by the exposition typical of these performances. Here, human dignity, because its significance reaches beyond the individual, must be protected even against the wishes of the woman concerned whose own subjective ideas deviate from the objective value of human dignity.10

No doubt, many further illustrations of the tension could be given. However, there is already more than enough to indicate that, where the public ordering of a society is orientated towards a constitutive value of human dignity, the way in which that ordering is articulated will depend on the competing influences of the liberal (empowering) and conservative (constraining) views.

#### Private order

In the sphere of private ordering, it will sometimes be agreed that there should be a particular limit on transactional freedom – for example, that there should be limits on the validity and enforceability of contracts concerning slavery, the procurement of human organs, surrogacy, various kinds of sexual services, gaming and so on. The reasons for recognizing these limits might be quite distinct and different – whereas liberals will be concerned about the extent to which such transactions are truly 'free', conservatives will find the purposes of the transactions offensive. Nevertheless, at the points of convergence, it is at least agreed that cases of this kind are where support for, and encouragement of, contracts should reach their end.

Such overlapping agreement notwithstanding, liberals and conservatives have very different approaches to transactional freedom. Whilst the pressure of liberalism is towards deregulation, in order to make room for private governance, it is characteristic of conservative thinking that human dignity needs to be conserved, that transactions should respect community values (Brownsword 2001). The tension can be detected in '*Jerusalem Community' Funeral Society* v. *Lionel Aryeh Kestenbaum*, 11 a decision of the Supreme Court of Israel. The contract at issue concerned the funeral arrangements for the respondent's wife. According to the respondent, it was his deceased wife's wish that her tombstone should show her name and her Gregorian date of birth and date of death in Latin characters. However, the funeral society refused to accede to this wish, relying on its standard form provisions which allowed only for the engraving of letters in the Hebrew alphabet. The question for the Court was whether this restrictive and non-negotiable standard-form provision was valid. For the minority, this was a legitimate attempt by the funeral society to preserve its traditions. However, for the majority, this was an unacceptable restriction on the respondent's freedom and, ultimately, it was a violation of his dignity. The term was invalid.

In an era of rapid developments in human genetics (Brownsword, Cornish and Llewelyn 1998), there might be broad support for a precautionary view

10 *Ibid.*: 277–9. 11 CA 294/91, 46 (2) PD 464 (Hebrew). of some emerging transactional practices – for instance, the circulation of personal genetic information in the context of employment and insurance contracts (which might lead to unacceptable forms of discrimination), the supply of direct-to-consumer genetic services, and various kinds of enhancement contracts. However, in the longer run, it is the conservative ideology that will resist such transactions in the name of respect for human dignity (see, for example, Sandel 2007).

#### Consent

The remarks of the Federal Administrative Tribunal in the *Peep-Show* decision (above) prefigure an enormously important point. Whereas liberals picture humans expressing their dignity through the choices that they make, including the choices that they make in giving or withholding their consent where this is an issue, conservative dignitarians treat consent as irrelevant. Quite distinctively, as the Tribunal emphasizes, where an act is judged to compromise human dignity, the fact that the offending act is a consensual one makes absolutely no difference to its impermissibility. According to this view, where an act involving two or more persons is categorically prohibited (because it compromises human dignity), that prohibition is not susceptible to being lifted by the persons involved giving their consent to the act.

In case after case, we see this lesson repeated. In the UK, we see it in *R* v. *Brown*, 12 where the majority of the House of Lords ruled that consent was no defence to the assaults and woundings inflicted during sado-masochistic sexual practices; we see it in another *Brown* case,13 this time in the US, where the court rejected the defendant's defence that his alcoholic wife consented to the beatings that he administered when she drank; in France, we see it in the famous dwarf-throwing case;14 and, in Germany, in addition to the *Peep-Show* decision, there is, of course, the more recent *Omega* case,15 in which the fact that the participants were freely consenting adults failed to salvage the Laserdrome's licence.

By contrast, where liberal thinking prevails, the fact that the parties are consenting is a central (although not sufficient) consideration that pushes towards permission. Thus, in a famous chapter of US constitutional jurisprudence, the Supreme Court, having been divided about the criminalization of consensual

- 15 *Omega Spielhallen- und Automatenaufstellungs-GmbH* v. *Oberb¨urgermeisterin der Bundesstadt Bonn* (Case C-36/02) (14 October 2004); OJ C 300, 04.12.2004 p. 3.
<sup>12</sup> [1993] 2 All ER 75.

<sup>13</sup> *State* v. *Brown*, 364 A 2d 27 (NJ Super. Ct Law Div, 1976), affirmed 381 A 2d 1231 (NJ Super. Ct App. Div. 1977).

<sup>14</sup> Conseil d'Etat (27 October 1995) req. nos. 136-727 (Commune de Morsang-sur-Orge) and 143-578 (Ville d'Aix-en-Provence).

adult homosexual acts, eventually decided in *Lawrence* v. *Texas*16 that restrictions on sexual freedom violate human dignity. For the majority, the earlier jurisprudence failed to grasp the breadth and depth of the liberty interest at stake and to appreciate that 'adults may choose to enter upon [such a sexual] relationship in the confines of their homes and their own private lives and still retain their dignity as free persons'.17 Summing up, the majority opinion concludes:

The case [involves] two adults who, with full and mutual consent from each other, engaged in sexual practices common to a homosexual lifestyle. The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime.18

While consent does not do all the work here, on the liberal view of human dignity, it is material; and, other things being equal, it is decisive.

#### Taking stock

Where a legal system is constitutively committed to respect for human rights, much of its business will be conducted with reference to particular rights. Sometimes, the underlying (constitutive) value of human dignity will make an appearance, particularly it seems where privacy is the right at issue or where the right against cruel and unusual punishment is central; but, for much of the time, it is a silent partner. Such liberal regimes can and do encounter cultural and legal resistance, particularly where there is a reluctance to move away from tradition or where there is a fear of dramatic and disruptive change. Here, we find recourse to a conservative notion of human dignity, designed to hold the line in both public and private ordering. In short, we might say that in those legal systems that have embraced the modern, the liberal view rules; but, in those systems that either hanker after the past or that fear the future, human dignity serves as a rallying point for conservative views (compare Matsui, in Chapter 45 below).

#### **The legal embedding of human dignity: positives and negatives**

While legal references to human dignity abound, there would be little support for the proposition that there should be a law providing, quite simply, that it is a criminal offence to act in a way that fails to respect, or that compromises, human dignity. Many would argue that this would violate the canons of the Rule of Law – or, at any rate, this would be so unless the context was one in which it was perfectly well understood in which circumstances the offence would be committed. In the same way, imagine that a legal system recognized claims for compensation where the tort (or delict) of violating human dignity

16 123 SCt 2472. 17 *Ibid.*: 2478. 18 *Ibid.*: 2484. was proved. Even though this branch of the law exposes defendants to claims for compensation rather than to punishment and stigma, it might be objected that such a vaguely formulated claim should not be recognized. What should we make of this? Are there good arguments in favour of expressly recognizing human dignity as a positive legal value? Or, is the better view that the positive law should exclude such references to human dignity?

Addressing these questions, we can start by sketching three arguments against the explicit referencing of human dignity in the positive law. The first two arguments – one based on fairness (particularly in relation to the criminal law) and the other based on utility (particularly in the area of commercial law) – treat the vague and contestable nature of the concept of human dignity as a problem. The third argument, based on liberal values of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, is not so much concerned that there should be clarity and calculability in the law as that references to human dignity might prove to be a hostage to fortune, inviting illiberal interpretations and applications.

In response to these arguments, three counter-considerations are outlined. First, for those who subscribe to a conservative dignitarian ethic, it is important that this constraint on free choice is reflected in the law. Second, even if one rejects such an ethic, one might see some utility in there being express reference to human dignity in certain legal contexts – for example, in those areas of law that are trying to regulate technological and cultural change (where the function of such references to human dignity is not action-guiding as such but rather to provide an opportunity for debate and reflection together with some flexibility), and, similarly, where attempts are being made to develop a degree of consensus in the context of value pluralism (the vagueness of the concept of human dignity being a virtue in such a context). Third, there is a rights-based argument in favour of transparency in legal decision-making. It follows that, if human dignity is the implicit ground for a decision, the parties to the dispute are entitled to have it made explicit.

The upshot of this discussion is that the question does not seem to have an allor-nothing answer. For, unless the range of law is specified in extremely narrow terms, there seem to be some aspects of the legal enterprise in which the express referencing of human dignity might be functional and appropriate. However, there is a further complication: namely, that the judgments that we make about functionality and appropriateness will be driven by competing ethics that go right back to the contested nature of human dignity itself. In other words, it is not just a matter of which particular part of the legal enterprise is in the spotlight, but also of which particular ethic is energizing the light.

#### Three negative arguments

In this part of the discussion, three arguments against the explicit referencing of human dignity in the positive law are sketched. These are: (1) the argument from fairness; (2) the argument from utility and commercial need; and (3) the argument from respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

#### The argument from fairness

Let us start with the hypothetical criminal law that provides that it is an offence to act in a way that fails to respect, or that compromises, human dignity. Without some context, it is difficult to assess such a provision. If this is the one and only offence in the criminal code, and if the setting is anything like a modern society, it would be difficult to know where one stood, to know whether one's acts were or were not criminal offences. In such circumstances, this would seem to be a serious departure from the guiding principles represented by the Rule of Law (Fuller 1969).

If our hypothetical criminal law is to do any better, the circumstances need to be modified in one or other of two ways. One way is to change the setting, so that we are supposing a small homogeneous community with well-understood social norms (Roberts 1979). In such a community, the one-provision criminal code might capture the spirit of the group's more particularized normative order. In such a context, the provision would be of no more than symbolic significance; it would not be intended to have any action-guiding function and so it would have some immunity against the Rule of Law objection.

The other way in which the hypothetical might be modified is by retaining the setting of a modern pluralistic society but with a developed and particularized criminal code. So long as the human dignity provision appears as one offence amongst many others, and so long as those many other offences are actionguiding, the legal order is less clearly pathological. Nevertheless, the question arises: what is the role and function of the human dignity offence? As with the simpler society, the answer might be that the function of the provision is symbolic – it has no utility but it does no harm. On the other hand, the answer might be that the offence can be brought into play where prosecutors can find no other offence that fits the 'crime'. If this is the answer, then once again the provision is likely to fall foul of Rule of Law values (see Lima Marques and Lixinski, in Chapter 41 below).

The demand made by the Rule of Law that legal provisions should be clear is at its strongest where non-compliance attracts penal sanctions. Here, it is commonly said that defendants must be given 'fair warning' that they are breaking the law;19 and that, in the event of an ambiguity, any benefit of the doubt must be given to the accused. Accordingly, to resort to the human dignity offence where all else fails is unfair; and no encouragement should be given to such provisions of last resort.20

- 19 For a well-known example, see *McBoyle* v. *US*, 283 US 25 (1931).
- 20 Compare Lord Diplock in *DPP* v. *Withers* [1974] 3 WLR 751, 761, criticizing the prosecution's reliance on a conspiracy charge.

#### The argument from utility and commercial need

Common lawyers believe that commercial people, especially commercial contractors, need to have calculable trading rules. For this reason, there is a degree of suspicion, probably at its highest amongst English contract lawyers, of general clauses (for example, clauses that require good faith and fair dealing in transactions) of the kind that are commonplace in both civilian contract codes and some common law jurisdictions as well as in harmonizing (regional and international) instruments (Brownsword 2006). Some take the view that the concern is overstated, claiming that the incorporation of explicit general clauses of this kind makes little practical difference (neither for better nor for worse). Nevertheless, the fact that English contract law, with its emphasis on calculability and its eschewal of good faith and the like, is the law of choice for many international traders suggests that there might be some substance in the concern for certainty. Taking such a view, even at the margins of contract law, appeals to human dignity should not be encouraged.

Turning from contracts to patents, those who invest in research and development (like contractors) need to know where they stand – in particular, they need to know that, if they develop innovative products or processes, they will be in a position to claim patent protection. Broadly speaking, patent regimes are geared for granting patents provided that the applicant shows that the work is inventive and has some utility. However, in Europe, the regional patent regime – which is rooted in the European Patent Convention 1973 and Directive 98/44/EC on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions – has an explicit moral exclusion in relation to patentability. In a string of controversial cases, the European Patent Office (EPO) has attempted to apply this exclusion to claims made in relation to genetically engineered animals and plants, as well as to coding sections of the human genome and the products of human embryonic stem cell research. While the moral arguments have not always centred on human dignity, appeals to human dignity are strongly encouraged by recital 38 of the Directive which underlines that, in addition to the specific exclusions that are identified in Article 6(2) of the Directive, any invention that compromises human dignity is to be excluded from patentability.

Although the moral exclusion has greatly agitated patent lawyers, and not just the English, the EPO managed for some years to reduce its practical impact by insisting that moral objections would not have exclusionary effect unless they were backed by an overwhelming consensus – which meant that contested concepts such as human dignity were marginalized (Brownsword and Goodwin 2012). However, in the *Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation* (WARF) case,21 the Enlarged Board of Appeal (EBA) at the EPO was asked by the Technical Board of Appeal22 to rule, *inter alia*, on whether Article 6(2)(c) of the Directive – which provides that uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes

<sup>21</sup> Case G 0002/06, 25 November 2008. 22 T 1374/04 (OJ EPO 2007, 313).

shall be treated as unpatentable – forbids the patenting of a human embryonic stem cell culture. Holding that the patent was excluded, the EBA said:

On its face, the provision . . . is straightforward and prohibits the patenting if a human embryo is used for industrial or commercial purposes. Such a reading is also in line with the concern of the legislator to prevent a misuse in the sense of a commodification of human embryos . . . and with one of the essential objectives of the whole Directive to protect human dignity.23

With this turn in the jurisprudence – and, *a fortiori*, after the parallel confirming decision of the European Court of Justice in *Oliver Br¨ustle* v. *Greenpeace eV*24 – critics can say, with some justification, that the patentability (in Europe) of leading-edge biotechnological work has been thrown into doubt; that this is bad for biotechnology and innovation in Europe; and, more generally, that the uncertainty surrounding the moral exclusion (and, concomitantly, its protection of human dignity) creates an unhelpful regulatory environment for innovators (Plomer and Torremans 2009).

#### The argument from respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms

There is a third and rather different argument against the use of explicit legal references to human dignity. So far, the two arguments have been more concerned with the law having clear and calculable applications than with the substance of legal provisions. However, the third argument is precisely that references to human dignity can permit interpretations and applications that are incompatible with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

On the face of it, this is a strange objection; for the modern demand that human rights and fundamental freedoms should be respected is predicated on respect for human dignity. Nevertheless, proponents of human rights may well feel that positive law can be articulated and applied in ways that are compatible with human rights without the need for any reference to human dignity. After all, the European Convention on Human Rights seems to work perfectly well without such an explicit reference – and, indeed, liberals have a real cause for concern if the Strasbourg court, relying on implicit references to human dignity, allows in conservative views as good reasons for restricting the Convention's rights.25

Taking this approach, there might be some concern that, with human dignity in the mix, there is too much constitutional noise and that this leads to a risk that there might be a loss of clarity as to the scope and function of particular human rights (Fagan 1998). However, the greater concern is that explicit references to human dignity will support legal applications that evince a lack of respect

<sup>23</sup> Case G 0002/06, para. 18. 24 Case C-34/10, OJ C 362, 10.12.2011.

<sup>25</sup> Compare the case of *SH* v. *Austria* (Application No. 57813/00 (1 April 2010). The judgment of the Grand Chamber was given on 3 November 2011).

for autonomy and self-determination. Famously, for example, in the dwarfthrowing ('*lancer de nain*') case,26 the Conseil d'Etat held that, where police powers had been exercised to ban dwarf-throwing in clubs, such steps were lawfully taken in order to secure respect for human dignity and *ordre public*. However, the legality of the bans was challenged by, among others, one of the dwarfs, who argued that he freely participated in the activity, that the work brought him a monthly wage, and that, if dwarf-throwing was banned, he would find himself unemployed again. To this, the Conseil d'Etat responded that the dwarf compromised his own dignity by allowing himself to be used as a projectile, as a mere thing, and that no such concession could be allowed.

While cases of this kind are not commonplace, it is not just dwarf-throwing that has been banned in the name of human dignity.27 More generally, as we have already remarked, whenever the human body or body parts are commodified or commercialized, or whenever there seems to be a lack of respect for the sanctity of human life, dignitarian values will tend to push for legal prohibition – and, where the law expressly references human dignity (even if the founding intentions were quite different), there is an available legal peg on which to hang the argument for restriction (Kadidal 1996).

#### Three positive arguments

Against the three negative arguments, we can suggest three counter-arguments. Whereas the first of these counter-arguments is unashamedly dignitarian, maintaining that the culture of respect for individual 'autonomy', 'choice' and 'consumerism' has gone too far, the second and third counter-arguments do not presuppose such values. Rather, these latter arguments return to the principles of utility, fairness and rights upon which the negative arguments rely.

#### The conservative dignitarian argument

Many national constitutions take it as axiomatic that human dignity should be respected. Where, as in Article 1 of the German Basic Law, the constitutive importance of human dignity is declared and embedded, the interpretive work remains to be done. Over time, the jurisprudence might develop in a way that is more or less consistent with the founding intentions, more or less consistent with liberal or conservative takes on human dignity, and so on. For conservative dignitarians, anything other than a jurisprudence that sticks to the script that captures the essence of humanity will not do. In other words, the dignitarian

<sup>26</sup> Conseil d'Etat (27 October 1995) req. nos. 136-727 (Commune de Morsang-sur-Orge) and 143-578 (Ville d'Aix-en-Provence).

<sup>27</sup> Compare, for example, *Omega Spielhallen-und Automatenaufstellungs-GmbH* v. *Oberb¨urgermeisterin der Bundesstadt Bonn* (Case C-36/02) (14 October 2004); OJ C 300, 04.12.2004 p. 3.

argument in favour of the explicit legal referencing of human dignity is not sufficient; it matters that the right kind of dignitarianism is fixed in the law.

Clearly, this kind of position will be opposed by liberals. However, there is a more subtle argument in favour of the referencing of human dignity that appeals to some common ground between the protagonists. The idea is that liberals and conservatives alike hold that individuals should try to do the right thing (to act ethically) for the right reason (Brownsword 2010). Insofar as modern regulatory technologies amplify prudential reasons for compliance with the law (as in the case of CCTV, or DNA profiling, or various kinds of biometrics), the moral signal is weakened (Larsen 2011); and, where the technologies render noncompliance impracticable or impossible, the moral signal is weakened even further. If humans are to express their dignity by doing the right thing for the right reason, they need a context in which they can develop moral virtue and then act on it. One of the key roles that the express legal referencing of human dignity might play in an increasingly technological setting, is to compel regulators to be very careful about employing strategies that might corrode the essential context for moral virtue (Brownsword 2008; Brownsword 2011).

#### The argument from utility

Where law is intended to be action-guiding, there are good arguments that favour its guidance being clear and its responses calculable. However, these arguments lose some traction as we move away from 'hard' law to 'softer' forms of law, to codes, informal guidance, voluntary standards, and the like. Soft law of this kind might be nested within hard law frameworks (for example, as with codes of practice that are anticipated by legislative frameworks) or it might be the kind of early stage governance that is relied on before a hard law intervention is viable. In the context of the various uncertainties associated with emerging technologies, such a strategy seems to have considerable utility (Dorbeck-Jung and van Amerom 2008; Mandel 2009). To the extent that these uncertainties concern the nature or extent of the risks to human health, safety, or the environment, it is not obvious that a softer law strategy needs to be built specifically around respect for human dignity. For human dignity to serve as a focal point for deliberation, consultation and debate, there needs to be a cultural concern – indeed, just the kind of concern elicited by human genetics, new reproductive technologies, synthetic biologies, technologies for human enhancement, nanomedicine, sophisticated brain imaging machines, and the like. In such cases, the technology is culturally disruptive and, by putting down a marker for human dignity, the law facilitates a serious debate about the direction of society.

Flowing from the previous point, in a world of value pluralism, it can be difficult to articulate agreements in terms that command all-round support. In this context, those who draft international soft law instruments will often make use of concepts such as human dignity as a means of establishing a working level of consensus. Arguably, the UNESCO Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights in1997 and, even more so, the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights in 2005, are examples of this approach to consensus-formation (see Byk, Chapter 37 below).

#### The argument from fairness and rights

One of the arguments that figures in the debates about general clauses in contract law is that, in the absence of such clauses, judges resort to indirect strategies to achieve results that could have been achieved directly had such clauses been in play. It is said, in other words, that such clauses promote honesty, transparency and integrity in adjudication. Similarly, in those patent law regimes that do not have explicit moral exclusions, it is said that moral considerations can covertly shape the reasoning of patent examiners and courts. What these arguments add up to is the claim that litigants and the public have a right to transparent and accurate reasons for legal decisions – and so, where (rightly or wrongly) decision-makers are going to reason from human dignity, this needs to be expressly represented in the law. Quite simply, fairness so dictates.

#### Taking stock

The question of the explicit legal referencing of human dignity is more complex than we might first suppose. However, should we also conclude that the arguments for and against are evenly balanced? If we are able to privilege liberal human rights over conservative dignitarian values, or *vice versa*, we will not so conclude. Rather, we will seek to embed a particular conception of human dignity in the law. Short of being able to specify a particular conception of human dignity, much will depend upon whether we are able to privilege a particular ethical approach – for example, rights over utility, or *vice versa*. However, even if we can do this, the 'take-home message' is not simple: if utility is the test, we might find the express referencing of human dignity a useful addition to some parts of the law but less useful in others; and, if fairness and rights is the test, we will almost certainly reject an ostensibly action-guiding reference to human dignity in the heartland of the criminal law, but, elsewhere in the law, such a reference might be supportive of rights.

#### **Concluding remarks**

Legal debates that revolve around human rights and human dignity are full of twists, turns, and unresolved difficulties. Liberals and conservatives seem to be destined to disagree. However, the fact that such debates are a feature of legal discourse underlines that, as humans, we share a concern, individually and collectively, to try to do the right thing. In an era of rapid technological development, operating in conjunction with the globalization of markets and trade, this is especially important. In such a context, it is imperative that communities with moral aspirations challenge the dominance of regulators who operate with a narrow risk-management (instrumental) mentality. It is also important to keep an eye on the complexion of the regulatory environment, particularly the replacement of normative legal and moral signals with technological management (various forms of coding, design, architecture, and the like) (Brownsword 2011). In our life and times, there is a danger that we lose sight of the simple virtue of doing the right thing. If our current preoccupation with human dignity leads us to ponder and to persist with such questions, then (*pace* the sceptics) we need to keep it and its questions firmly in the regulatory foreground (Brownsword 2013).

#### **References**

- Adams, J. N., and Brownsword, R. 2006. *Understanding Law*. London: Sweet & Maxwell
- Andorno, R. 2009. 'Article 3: Human Dignity and Human Rights', in H. A. M. J. ten Have and M. S. Jean (eds.), *The UNESCO Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights*. Paris: UNESCO, 91–8
- Appiah, K. A. 2006. *Cosmopolitanism*. London: Penguin, Allen Lane
- Beyleveld, D., and Brownsword, R. 2001. *Human Dignity in Bioethics and Biolaw*. Oxford University Press

2007. *Consent in the Law*. Oxford: Hart Publishing

- Brownsword, R. 2001. 'Freedom of Contract, Human Rights and Human Dignity', in D. Friedmann and D. Barak-Erez (eds.), *Human Rights in Private Law*. Oxford: Hart Publishing, 181–99
	- 2003. 'Bioethics Today, Bioethics Tomorrow: Stem Cell Research and the "Dignitarian Alliance"', *University of Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy* 17: 15–51

2006. *Contract Law: Themes for the Twenty-First Century*. Oxford University Press

- 2007. 'Ethical Pluralism and the Regulation of Modern Biotechnology', in F. Francioni (ed.), *Biotechnologies and International Human Rights*. Oxford: Hart Publishing, 45–70
- 2008. *Rights, Regulation, and the Technological Revolution*. Oxford University Press
- 2010. 'Regulating the Life Sciences, Pluralism, and the Limits of Deliberative Democracy', *Singapore Academy of Law Journal* 22: 801–32
- 2011. 'Lost in Translation: Legality, Regulatory Margins, and Technological Management', *Berkeley Technology Law Journal* 26: 1321–65
- 2013. 'Human Dignity, Human Rights, and Simply Trying To Do the Right Thing', in C. McCrudden (ed.), *Understanding Human Dignity*. Proceedings of the British Academy. Oxford University Press, 470–90
- Brownsword, R., Cornish, W. R., and Llewelyn, M. (eds.).1998. *Law and Human Genetics: Regulating a Revolution*. Oxford: Hart Publishing
- Brownsword, R., and Goodwin, M. 2012. *Law and the Technologies of the Twenty-First Century*. Cambridge University Press
- Caulfield, T., and Brownsword, R. 2006. 'Human Dignity: A Guide to Policy Making in the Biotechnology Era', *Nature Reviews Genetics* 7: 72–6
- Clapham, A. 1993. *Human Rights in the Private Sphere*. Oxford: Clarendon Press
- Dan-Cohen, M. 2002. *Harmful Thoughts: Essays on Law, Self, and Morality*. Princeton University Press
- Dorbeck-Jung, B., and van Amerom, M. 2008. 'The Hardness of Soft Law in the United Kingdom: State and Non-State Regulatory Activities Related to Nanotechnological Development', in H. van Schooten and J. Verschuuren (eds.), *International Governance and Law*. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 129–50
- Fagan, A. 1998. 'Dignity and Unfair Discrimination: A Value Misplaced and a Right Misunderstood', *South African Journal on Human Rights* 14: 220–47
- Feldman, D. 1999. 'Human Dignity as a Legal Value: Part I', *Public Law* 682–702
- Fletcher, G. P. 1996. *Basic Concepts of Legal Thought*. Oxford University Press
- Fuller, Lon L. 1969. *The Morality of Law*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
- Goodin, R. E.1981. 'The Political Theories of Choice and Dignity', *American Philosophical Quarterly* 18: 91–100
- Green, Sir G. 2007. 'Human Dignity and the Law', in J. Malpas and N. Lickiss (eds.), *Perspectives on Human Dignity: A Conversation*. Dordrecht: Springer, 151–6
- Kadidal, S. 1996. 'Obscenity in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction', *American Journal of Comparative Law* 44: 353–85
- Kirby, M. 2010. 'Health Care and Global Justice', *Singapore Academy of Law Journal* 22: 785–800
- Kolnai, A. 1976. 'Dignity', *Philosophy* 51: 251–71
- Larsen, B. von S. T. 2011. *Setting the Watch: Privacy and the Ethics of CCTV Surveillance*. Oxford: Hart Publishing
- Mandel, G. N. 2009. 'Regulating Emerging Technologies', *Law, Innovation, and Technology* 1: 75–92
- McCrudden, C. 2008. 'Human Dignity and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights', *European Journal of International Law* 19: 655–724
- Packer, H. L. 1969. *The Limits of the Criminal Sanction*. Stanford University Press
- Plomer, A., and Torremans, P. (eds.). 2009. *Embryonic Stem Cell Patents–European Law and Ethics*. Oxford University Press
- Raz, J. 1979. *The Authority of Law*. Oxford: Clarendon Press
- Roberts, S. 1979. *Order and Dispute*. London: Penguin
- Sandel, M. 2007. *The Case Against Perfection: Ethics in the Age of Genetic Engineering*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- Ten Have, H. A. M. J., and Jean, M. S. (eds.). 2009. *The UNESCO Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights*. Paris: UNESC