# Human dignity in traditional Chinese Confucianism

LUO AN'XIAN

The core of Chinese Confucianism concerns personhood: it addresses questions as to how to conduct oneself and what kind of person one should be. The basic notions of Chinese Confucianism are benevolence, righteousness, ritual, wisdom and integrity. The Confucian concept of human dignity is deeply interwoven with these core concepts of Confucianism. Human dignity in Confucianism addresses core questions of Confucian convictions such as how to deal with life and death, honour and disgrace, loyalty etc. This chapter will present central doctrines to these questions of the main representatives of Confucianism and attempt to disclose how human dignity may be conceived in this tradition.

#### **Confucius: human dignity and benevolence**

Although Confucianism affirms that all human life is valuable, in case of conflict, in cases wherein one has to risk his life in order to uphold benevolence and righteousness, the latter take priority over life itself. 'Benevolence' in Confucianism indicates care for other people and social groups. Fan Chi, a student of Confucius, once asked his master as to the meaning of benevolence.1 The master responded that benevolence means to love people: benevolence means to love genuinely or authentically, to desire the well-being of others without seeking to profit from their well-being oneself. The virtue of benevolence is what makes life valuable: a life without benevolence is a life not worth living. Thus, Confucius claims that 'for gentlemen of purpose and men of benevolence, while it is inconceivable that they should seek to stay alive at the expense of benevolence, it may happen that they have to accept death in order to accomplish benevolence' (Confucius 2008: 15: 9). In circumstances wherein a specific person does not live in accordance with the requirements of benevolence or even acts in opposition to these, his life is no longer valuable: a life without benevolence is a life without *dignity*. Hence, even in the tragic situation wherein the act of benevolence

1 Confucius (551–479 BCE) lived in what is known in Chinese history as the 'Spring and Autumn Period'. He was the founder and the most important exponent of Confucianism.

would entail death, Confucianism holds that benevolence is morally overriding because the alternative – an undignified life – is hardly a life at all. However, benevolence cannot be externally enforced; Confucius says that 'the practice of benevolence depends on oneself alone, and not on others' (Confucius 2008: 12: 1).2 To live in accordance with dignity depends wholly on the individual person: benevolence can only have its ground in free choice. As the true manifestation of character and personality, benevolence is not something one person can force upon another. People have the right to choose for themselves how they live and die, and it is up to them to choose death in order to retain their dignity. The moment of choice so conceived represents the dignity of life. Although the acceptance of death for the sake of benevolence appears as a denial of life, it is in fact a true symbol of dignity. Though life is precious, a life without dignity is meaningless and worthless, and therefore people – whether they are of high or low social status – should live with dignity even if that entails embracing death in some circumstances.

#### **Mencius: human dignity and righteousness**

Where Confucius emphasizes benevolence, Mencius3 attaches more importance to righteousness. Mencius said: 'I like life and I like righteousness. But if I have to choose between them I will let go of life and take righteousness' (Mencius 2003; Kao Tzu, 1: 10).4 Righteousness is an absolute and unconditional 'should' and an expression of responsibility. Confucians believe that human existence is a kind of social existence. As social beings, all humans play a different role in society and have different social responsibilities. Members of society should strive to carry out their own social responsibilities and realize their particular destinies – this is what Confucians understand by 'righteousness'. Life and righteousness are both cherished by people; however, people should 'let go of life and take righteousness' whenever the two cannot coexist righteousness is more valuable than mere survival. Mencius said: 'I want life, but there are things more important to me than life. Therefore there are things that I won't do simply to stay alive. I hate death, but there are things that I hate more than death, and thus there are certain kinds of suffering that I won't avoid' (*ibid*.). Also, for Mencius, there are things more precious than life. So, again, only a life with dignity – in this case understood in terms of righteousness – is understood as a life worth living: without righteousness, life is mere animal-like subsistence.

<sup>2</sup> The *Analects of Confucius* is a collection of aphorisms attributed to Confucius, thought to be written down by his followers. The *Analects* consists of twenty sections or books, each divided in subsections. References in this chapter provide book number and subsection.

<sup>3</sup> Mencius (372–289 BCE) was a representative of the Confucian School. His status is only slightly lower than Confucius'.

<sup>4</sup> The Kao Tzu is the sixth book of the works of Mencius. It consists of two parts, divided into several chapters; references here are provided likewise.

While Confucius connects dignity to benevolence, Mencius conceives it in terms of righteousness. In the Confucian tradition, these two approaches have become integrated into an ideal of personal conduct: into a comprehensive and multifaceted account of what it means to lead a dignified life. In the Chinese tradition, such ethical ideals are not developed in the analytical style characteristic of many Western ethical positions; they are rather exemplified in narratives like short stories and aphorisms. I mention one: Wen Tianxiang, the prime minister of the Southern Song Dynasty, was captured by the Yuan Dynasty rulers. He was tortured and tempted by the rulers with various means. However, Wen Tianxiang refused the high official position and salary offered and withstood the cruel torture; he would rather die than surrender. Wen chose to die calmly and left behind famous and compelling lines of poetry: 'None since the advent of time have escaped death, may my loyalty forever illuminate the annals of history'; 'I would rather sacrifice my life for integrity than to eke an ignoble existence, may the integrity and righteousness shine and last forever.' Wen chose benevolence and righteousness over survival, died with dignity and lived a glorious life. As such, Wen became an exemplary model of a dignified person, his story provides guidance for others in attempting to live a dignified life.

#### **Dignity and integrity**

In a different way, dignity is strongly tied to integrity. Integrity refers to fortitude and steadfastness: possessing integrity means that one maintains his personality or character, especially in situations in which he is put to the test – as for instance in circumstances of calamity or life-threatening danger. Confucius said: 'The Three Armies can be deprived of their commander, but there is no way a common man can be deprived of his purpose' (Confucius 2008: 9: 26). This means that people cannot be forced to give up their own personality and conduct or the guidance for their own lives. Mencius points this out more clearly: 'If wealth and honour do not dissipate you; poverty and low status do not make you move from your principles; authority and might do not distort you: [t]hen you can be called a "great man"' (Mencius 2003: T'eng Weng Kung, 2: 2).5 A man who will neither be confused by wealth and honour, nor change his behaviour when he is poor and low, nor thwart his principles in the face of power is a man with dignity, a 'great man'. Xun Zi6 said: '[T]he exigencies of time and place and considerations of personal profit cannot influence him, cliques and coteries cannot sway him, and the whole world cannot deter him. He was born to follow his principles, and he will die following them: truly this can be called "being resolute from inner power"' (Xun zi, in Knoblock 1988: 1: 14). Whether one lives or dies, no matter what kind of power or hardship one faces, nothing must change one's ambition or conduct – dignity lies precisely in steadfastness.

<sup>5</sup> The T'eng Weng Kung is the third book of the Mencius.

<sup>6</sup> Xun Zi (313–238BC) is a representative of the Confucian School.

Let me rehearse another short story to exemplify this: Su Wu, the minister of the Han Dynasty, was seized by the potentates of the Huns during his diplomatic mission on behalf of the Han Dynasty. The potentates of the Huns tried various means to force or tempt Su Wu to betray the Han Dynasty in order to serve the Huns as an official. Su Wu just refused to yield, and was exiled to a deserted Siberia where he spent a long nineteen years alone. However, Su Wu kept his faith without wavering and refused to betray his motherland. In this way, Su Wu not only safeguarded his own dignity, but also that of his motherland, thus becoming a typical Confucian 'great man' who cannot be dissipated by wealth and honour, cannot be made to move from his own principles by poverty and low status, and cannot be corrupted by authority and might. So where benevolence and righteousness are virtues that give content to the notion of a dignified life in the form of ethical principles, integrity refers rather to the formal quality of steadfastness: to stand one's ground and stick to the principles one affirms, regardless of the circumstances.

Let me illustrate this with another few aphorisms. Mencius once said: 'When a bowl of rice or a cup of soup lies between life and death, and you offer it in a nasty way, even a beggar in the street will not accept it. If you kick it at him with your feet, even a beggar will not take it' (Mencius, Kao Tzu, 1: 10). People should maintain their dignity even in the cold, even when hungry. Alms accepted when given with a contemptuous attitude would damage the human dignity of recipients and thus will be refused by them, even by beggars. *The Book of Rites*7 records that, one year, the state of Qi suffered a severe famine. A rich man named Qian Ao put some food at the roadside, waiting for the hungry to pass by. A horrendous-looking man who was shading his face with his sleeve and wore a pair of broken shoes staggered close to the food. After seeing the poor man, Qian Ao picked up the food with his left hand and held the soup with his right hand, and arrogantly yelled: 'Hey! Eat it!' The hungry man raised his head and glared contemptuously at him: 'I would rather be hungry than to take this handout' (Legge 2003: 2: 3). Qian Ao realized his impolite tone was a bit too much and apologized to the poor hungry man, but the man refused to eat and eventually starved to death at the roadside. The man's refusal to accept the food offered to him was an act that preserved his dignity, but also reflects the requirements of the Confucian theory of benevolence in that it symbolizes the limits that should be respected if one person is to respect another's dignity. Confucianism states thus that the dignity of the individual human being should be respected and not offended. Subject to the influence of Confucian ideology and culture, many traditional intellectuals risked their power and lives to protect their own human dignity. As a last story: Xi Gang was a painter of the Qing Dynasty. When the Emperor Qian Long made a journey in Zhejiang Province, the palace in which he lived lacked any murals. The prefect of Hangzhou City

7 *The Book of Rites* is one of the Chinese Confucian literature collections of the pre-Qin Dynasty. References here specify book number and part.

summoned Xi Gang and ordered him to paint a mural. Xi Gang refused by saying: 'You can cut my head off, but you cannot get the mural.' Not even a prefect or emperor can force a person to lose his dignity: human dignity has its ground in the individual freedom of action.

As these stories show, in Confucianism benevolence, righteousness and integrity form a notion of human dignity that functions as an ethical ideal/code of conduct and explains what it means to live a dignified – a fully human – life: to care for one's fellow people without desiring anything in return, to accept the responsibilities related to one's particular social role and to act on these, and to endorse these ethical ideals even – or especially – in situations in which the strength of one's character is put to the test.

#### **Conclusion**

In Confucianism, human dignity plays a very important role: a life without dignity is not a life worth living. The Confucian notion of human dignity shows similarities to various Western traditions. First, it resonates strongly with reflections on human dignity in Greek antiquity: especially in the Stoic tradition we find similarities with the Confucian emphasis on righteousness and integrity, the idea that one should retain character and poise regardless of the perils and hardships that destiny or fortune unfolds. Second, the virtue of benevolence and the right to have one's dignity respected obviously have connections with Kantianism: both traditions affirm that people have a duty to treat other human beings in a way that respects their dignity. The Confucian concept, however, also has many differences to contemporary Western accounts of human dignity; the most fundamental of which perhaps is that in Confucianism human dignity is not conceived as inalienable. When an individual lacks steadfastness and acts contrary to his principles out of cowardice or even personal gain, he will lose his dignity: by acting in an animal-like fashion, he will no longer be a human being in the full sense of the word. This is a very profound difference, and it gives rise to the question if and how the Confucian account of human dignity and the one articulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights could be seen as compatible. In any case, I would suggest, this question is important and we need to answer it if we are to formulate a global concept of human dignity.

#### **References**

- Confucius. 2008. *The Analects of Confucius*, trans. D. C. Lau. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company
- Knoblock, J. 1988. *Xun Zi: A Translation and Study of the Complete Works*. Stanford University Press
- Legge, J. 2003. *Li Chi: The Book of Rites*, vol. 1. Whitefish: Kessinger

Mencius. 2003. *Mencius (Selections)*, trans. C. Muller. Tokyo: Toy¯ o Gakuen University ¯