### Hinduism: the universal self in a class society

JENS BRAARVIG

Human dignity in the Indian tradition is an immense topic; in this chapter, I will discuss some aspects of human dignity in the Hindu tradition. As a rough definition, I take Hinduism to refer to those traditions that accept the Vedic heritage (*´sruti*, 'heard from the gods') as the source of truth.

I will employ three main sources for our inquiry into human dignity in the Hindu tradition: the *Upanis.ads*, the Laws of Manu and the *Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a*. I will discuss each of these in turn, and suggest that human dignity in Hinduism is an ambiguous and perhaps even paradoxical concept: on the one hand, all living beings (not solely human beings) are thought to possess *inherent* dignity, but on the other hand we find that in the social realm dignity appears in *degrees*.

#### **The Upanis . ads**

The *Upani*s. ads1 are dialogues in Sanskrit which were handed down orally as part of the Veda, articulating the essentials of Vedic wisdom. These dialogues, stemming from approximately the sixth century BC, contain two central doctrines: the teachings of *atman ¯* and *brahman* – explaining the identity of Self and Universal Whole – and the doctrine of reincarnation or metempsychosis.

The *Upanis.ads* express a world view which is centred on the individual, but with the corollary that the self, *atman ¯* , is everywhere: it is really one with all things, the Whole, and as such one with *brahman* – the life power which suffuses the universe and is the ground of all material things. Material objects, phenomena, are really the projection of human experience:

In the beginning this world was only brahman, and it knew only itself (at¯ man), thinking: 'I am brahman.' As a result it became the Whole. Among the gods, likewise, whosoever realized this, only they became the Whole. It was the same

1 For the twelve oldest *Upanis.ads*, see now Olivelle 1998 with an up-to-date bibliography. The two oldest of these twelve *Upanis.ads* are the *Br.had¯aran. yaka-upanis.ad* (BU) and the *Ch¯andogya*- (CU), filling almost two-thirds of the whole corpus as thus defined. The others are *Taittir¯ıya-upanis.ad* (TU), *Aitareya*- (AU), *Kaus. ¯ıtak¯ı*- (KsU), *Kena*- (KeU) *Kat .ha*- (KaU), *I´¯sa*- (IU), *Svet¯ ´ a´svatara*- (SU), ´ *Mun. d. aka*- (MuU), *Pra´sna*- (PU), and the *M¯an. d. ukya ¯* -*upanis.ad* (MaU).

also among the seers and among humans. Upon seeing this very point, the seer Vamade ¯ va proclaimed: 'I was Manu, and I was the sun.' This is true even now. If a man knows 'I am brahman' in this way, he becomes the whole world. Not even the gods are able to prevent it, for he becomes their very self (atman). So when a ¯ man venerates another deity, thinking: 'He is one, and I am another', he does not understand. (Bu: 9–10)

So human beings, other living things and gods are not in essence distinct selves: they are unified in one entity, which is at the same time the individual and the universal. As such, the self is eternal and unchanging: *atman ¯* is the self that is free from evil, old age, sorrow, hunger and thirst – 'the self whose desires and intentions are real . . . When someone discovers this self and perceives it, he obtains all the worlds, and his desires are fulfilled' (CU: 7, 1). Obviously the self cannot be perceived in quite the same way human beings perceive material objects: perceiving *atman ¯* cannot be sensory, but is rather a form of or intuition of that which is *behind* all sensory perception;

That which is the hearing behind hearing, the thinking behind thinking, the speech behind speech, the sight behind sight – It is also the breathing behind breathing – freed completely from these, the wise become immortal, when they depart from this world. (KeU: 1, 2)

When a human being intuits his true self – *at ¯ man* – he becomes one with *brahman*: he manifests *brahman* as his true self, becomes one with the Universal Whole. This Universal Whole, however, is *par excellence* present in the priestly class, the *brahmin* (in Sanskrit, *br¯ahman. a*), but can also be communicated via the central institution of Vedic society: the sacrifice. In the sacrifice the cosmic qualities, the universe is brought into the sphere of the individual: the individual appears as the *projection* of the universal – exemplifying the idea that the self is identical with *brahman*, with the life power which lies 'behind' sensible phenomena.

The idea which is central to the Indian view of man, that of reincarnation, also has its origin in Vedic literature, and especially the *Upanis.ads*. The social correlate to the philosophical individualism described above appears in various ascetic movements – the ascetic, or *´sraman. a*, whose aim was a search for and realization of individual salvation from the round of eternal rebirth, *moks.a*. Perhaps surprisingly, in the *Upanis.ads* it is not so much the (im)moral character of one's actions (*karma*) which determines rebirth or salvation, but rather the *season* in which a person deceases. If one dies in a time wherein the sun moves northwards, from winter to summer solstice, one will ascend through the various worlds towards the sun; with which one will be united and never again reborn. In this quality, the sun seems equivalent with *brahman*. Those individuals who die when the sun moves southwards, i.e. the other half of the year, will go to the realm of the deceased Fathers and from there to the Moon, where they will be food for the gods. And as the gods rain down on the Earth, these deceased will grow in the form of plants and in turn become food for men or animals. So salvation has nothing to do with *karma* in the moral sense: liberation from the round of eternal rebirth is not attained by good action but rather by the moment of death. This account of salvation, however, is balanced with another: the idea that union with *brahman* is attained by knowledge of *brahman*.

The wise one – he is not born, he does not die; he has not come from anywhere; he has not become anyone. He is unborn and eternal, primeval and everlasting. And he is not killed, when the body is killed. If the killer thinks he kills; If the killer thinks he is killed; Both of them do not understand. He neither kills, nor is he killed. (KaU: 2, 18, 19)

The wise man is beyond good and evil, he finds liberation from the round of rebirth by the development of a supreme *knowledge* of the self, sometimes complemented with asceticism and meditation.

In the context of the question of dignity within the Hindu tradition, with respect to the *Upanis.ads* we could thus say that it is in essence an *individualistic* concept: the idea of the unification of the self with the Universal Self is an individual, in no ways social affair. Concomitantly, dignity does not hold social or legal significance.

#### **The Laws of Manu**

The *M¯anavadharma´s¯astra* or *Manusmr. ti*, 2 which probably stems from a later period – it is notoriously difficult to date Indian texts since they were initially orally transmitted – is a story wherein the more or less mythical figure of Manu, the wise law-giver, teaches the universal laws to his pupils. These laws articulate an account of dignity which entwines the concept with social status: dignity is dependent on social class.3

Manu received the universal laws from the creator of the world, the 'Self-Existent Lord' (*svayam. bh¯ur bhagav¯an*), who created four distinct social classes together with the world;

For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced from his mouth, arms, thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ks. atriya, the Vaisya, and the ´ Sudra. (I: ´ 31)

These classes are hierarchically ordered: the priests form the class all others have to serve; the warrior aristocracy provides the king, the military and government officials; the traders and farmers come thereafter; the lowest class is made up by the servants and slaves. All classes have their own and very strict codes of

- 2 For the texts on historical Indian law, i.e. the *Dharmasutras ¯* , see Olivelle (2000; 2005a); and, for a translation and edition of the *M¯anavadharma´s¯astra*, see Olivelle 2005b.
- 3 On the Indian class society, see the classical work of Dumont 1966.

conduct; in particular, those of the priests and warrior aristocracy are described in detail. The wisdom of the Veda, the traditional sacrificial hymns and the foundation of all rites, is accessible to all except the lowest class; which means slaves and servants cannot partake in any socially respected activity. But it also means that those belonging to lower classes will have difficulty in achieving liberation from the round of rebirth, the unification with *brahman*: the life of the man of learning or the aristocrat is regarded as 'purer' than those of people belonging to lower classes – although *in principle* every individual possesses basic dignity, from the perspective of the social system dignity comes in degrees.

The distinction between the classes is strict, but also understood as fair and seldom questioned. The reason for this is not only that the class system was thought to have its origin in the creation of the world; the concept of *karma* explains that the class in which a person is born (if he is born human obviously; he may also be reborn as an animal, god or ghost) is his own responsibility. The situation in which a person finds himself is wholly dependent on his past actions: differences, privileges and hardships of various sorts are explained and justified on the basis of the idea that these are products of one's previous lives. This is reflected in Law and legal proceedings (*vyavah¯ara*). Punishments in cases of unlawful behaviour are *graded* in accordance with the social class to which a person belongs: if a brahmin and a farmer were to commit the same crime, the punishment the brahmin would receive would be milder than that of the farmer. It is important to note that both deserve punishment: although the practice of punishment is obviously in a sense meant to inspire fear in others, in the Vedic tradition it is also thought to exist for the sake of the punished. Punishment is also a form of *purification*; for instance, if a man were to steal or have illicit sexual intercourse, his sin may be purified by cutting off the relevant bodily limb.

Although this class-dependent concept of dignity is, as said above, very strict, it is balanced by a doctrine we encountered previously: the doctrine of liberation from the round of rebirth. The *M¯anavadharma´s¯astra* describes the path to liberation in terms of four stages in a man's life:4 as a young man, the *ar¯ ya* (member of Vedic society) should study the Veda; starting with puberty, he should enjoy sexuality and build a family; then he must leave the family and become a 'forest dweller'; then in the last phase of his life give up all his belongings and seek truth – with the hope of finding salvation. This balances the notion of class-dependent dignity because the mendicant is always respected, regardless of which class he belongs to – although it is obviously easier for those who are purer to find liberation.

<sup>4</sup> In the Vedic tradition all which is said here applies to men only: a woman has no separate rights outside of her family – she follows her husband in life and is to partake in his ritual life.

Summing up, we could say that in the Laws of Manu the concept of dignity appears differently from in the *Upanis.ads*: although the ideal of liberation from eternal rebirth is retained – and in that sense so too are some of the individualistic aspects of dignity – it is countered by a very strict social notion of class-dependent or graded dignity.

#### **The Bhagavadgıt¯ a¯**

The *Bhagavadg¯ıta¯* or 'Song of the Lord' – which is often called simply '*G¯ıt¯a*', or 'The Song' – appeared quite late in the last millennium BC and, although it was a relatively small book, could be said to form the basis for later Indian religious thought. In the text, the notion of *dharma*, duty or law, is combined with the idea of liberation: the highest ideal articulated in the *G¯ıt¯a* is doing one's duty for the sake of God, as a sacrifice to God. If one's actions are motivated only by devotion to God, one will become one with the divine essence of God and be liberated from the round of rebirth.

At the start of the *G¯ıt¯a*, we read of a prince named Arjuna who is confronted with his own cousins on the battleground. Arjuna is saddened because he does not want to fight his cousins – slaying relatives is against *dharma* – but he is a warrior and it would be against his dignity to show the weakness of abstaining from attack. Arjuna finds himself in a moral dilemma. His charioteer, Kr. s.n. a – the incarnation of the Supreme God – speaks to him, and in this speech all the previous traditions are mentioned. The speech ends, however, with a new kind of religious message: the idea of devotion to a personal God, or the concept of self-less action. The strictly class-related notion of dignity is hereby less emphasized: indeed, the *G¯ıt¯a* ascribes a form of religious dignity to everybody, not solely to the elite of monks and religious specialists – perhaps one could say the text draws upon the individualistic account of dignity one finds in the *Upanis.ads*. This notion, however, is extended in the*G¯ıt¯a* in the sense that it gains a duty-related connotation: following the *dharma*, the law or duty in accordance with one's birth into a particular way of life, is extolled. What it means to do well is not, as we found in the *M¯anavadharma´s¯astra*, solely to be understood in terms of class-dependent norms, nor is it, as in the *Upanis.ads*, wholly unrelated to laws/duties: in the *G¯ıt¯a*, we find an account of dignity which integrates the aim of unification with God and the practice of sacrifice with the concept of moral action. To become unified with God, to find salvation from the circle of rebirth, is to do one's duty as a sacrifice to God: only when one renounces all personal gain, is motivated purely by devotion to God – doing one's duty because it is one's duty – may an action be truly valuable and dignified. It is important to emphasize that this includes the aim of salvation: actions committed in order to find liberation from the circle of rebirth will not unify one with God, only those actions which are truly self-less will let the individual participate in the divine essence. Only then is one freed from all *dharmas*, duties and laws, as stated by the divine incarnation:

Be Me-minded, devoted to Me; Worship Me, revere me; And to Me alone shalt thou go; truly to thee I promise it – (because) you art dear to me. Abandoning all (other) duties, Go to Me as thy sole refuge; From all evils I thee Shall rescue: be not grieved! (XIII: 65–6)

And eventually indeed, Arjuna is inspired by the speech of the God and decides to fight:

Destroyed the confusion; attention (to the truth) is won, By Thy grace, on my part, O Changeless One; I stand firm, with doubts dispersed; I shall do Thy Word. (XIII: 73)

Thus, we find that the *G¯ıt¯a* grants a religious identity and dignity to the individual, regardless of the class to which he (or even she; the text is written in gender-neutral terms) belongs – provided that duties are performed from pure motives, from devotion, and are not in any way inspired by personal gain.

Summing up, we can say that the concept of dignity is given shape differently in these three main sources of Hindu thought. In the *Upanis.ads*, we find that dignity is related to the individual self who should strive for unification with the Universal Self, where dignity lacks a social or moral connotation. In the *M¯anavadharma´s¯astra*, the social dimension of dignity is strongly emphasized in the sense that the concept becomes class-dependent: although in principle all who achieve liberation from the circle of rebirth command respect, the concept is in a sense elitist because *karma* and the concomitant notion of radical responsibility legitimizes the class system and morally favours those belonging to the higher classes over others. It is only in the *G¯ıt¯a* that dignity becomes something resembling an egalitarian moral concept: dignity is related to selfless action and in that quality is independent from class. As such, the religion of the *G¯ıt¯a* has historically been the ground for the ascription of religious rights to each individual. On the other hand, however, the religion also refutes dignity as a concept: especially in the ninth chapter, the *G¯ıt¯a* emphasizes that God is the basic power in the Universe; human existence as a feeble fact compared to the truly divine.

All in all, we can say that, in the Hindu tradition, dignity appears as an ambiguous and even paradoxical concept; sometimes it appears as an inherent attribute of the individual, sometimes it is dependent on social class, and sometimes a concept related to moral action but is in that quality strongly religious. Taking these traditions together, we see that a type of accentuated individualism coexists with a social system which is programmatically unequal, showing us that a particular anthropology, which ascribes dignity to humans and animals alike, does not necessarily create social conventions that promote the principle of inherent and equal dignity for all human beings.

#### **References**

Dumont, L. 1966. *Homo Hierarchicus: Essai sur le syst`eme des castes*. Paris: Gallimard

- Olivelle, P. 1998. *The Early Upanis.ads: Annotated Text and Translation*. Oxford University Press
	- 2000. *Dharmas¯utra Parallels: Containing the Dharmas¯utras of Apastamba, Gautama, ¯ Baudh¯ayana and Vasis. t .a*. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
	- 2005a. *Dharmas¯utras: The Law Codes of Apastamba, Gautama, Baudh¯ ¯ ayana and Vasis. t .a*. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
	- 2005b. *Manu's Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the M¯anavadharma´s¯astra*. Oxford University Press