# Human dignity in German law

HORST DREIER

Human dignity is a concept that affects much more than the field of law, not only in Germany, but also in other countries. In Germany, it found its first written embodiment in the legal system in Article 1, paragraph 1, of the German Federal Constitution (*Grundgesetz*) of May 1949, which corresponded to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of December 1948. From that point began the triumphant development of human dignity, finding also expression in Article 1 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Today, human dignity constitutes a central point of reference in practically every moral and legal discourse around the world.

In this chapter, I will examine, first, the exceptional position of human dignity in the constitutional order of the Federal Republic of Germany. The subsequent sections analyze the difficulties in interpreting this fundamental notion of law. The next section demonstrates how human dignity influences in different ways the current (statutory) law (private law, criminal law, public law). This will demonstrate that the absoluteness and imponderable nature of human dignity can only be preserved if its application is limited to a small but absolutely undisputed and generally accepted number of factual situations. The assumed triumphant development of human dignity, however, produces the result that this exceptional principle becomes trivialized and thus ultimately loses significance.

#### **Human dignity as the supreme rule of constitutional law**

Article 1, paragraph 1, of the German Constitution states: 'Human dignity shall be inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all state authority.'1 This norm has become absolutely outstanding and increasingly dominating in the legal order of the German Federal Republic (Geddert-Steinacher 1990; Enders 1997; Dederer 2009; Teifke 2011). Besides the symbolic position of being first on the list of fundamental rights at the beginning of the Constitution, its outstanding role is confirmed by general characterizations of the norm by highly respected German scholars. Thus, Konrad Hesse attached to human

1 Inter Nationes translation: see www.iuscomp.org/gla/statutes/GG.htm#1. dignity 'immense importance as the normative foundation of this historically concrete polity' (1995: 55); Hasso Hofmann called it the 'essence of the German federal state' ('*Sinn bundesrepublikanischer Staatlichkeit*') (1993: 357). The German Federal Constitutional Court has always characterized human dignity as the 'highest value' and 'central constitutional principle' and sometimes as the 'fundamental rule' of the Constitution.2 This remains the case today: human dignity represents the 'highest legal value';3 it is the 'fundamental principle and highest value'4 of the Constitution. This indicates that Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution is neither a solemn proclamation nor a mere political manifesto, but an applicable legal principle binding all public authorities.5 The expression 'inviolable' is not intended to be descriptive, but prescriptive. It is certainly correct that an outlawed, tortured or otherwise inhumanely victimized person does not lose his human dignity so that this dignity truly remains inviolable – a thought which can ultimately be traced back to stoic philosophy (Margalit 1999). If a person can therefore never be deprived of his or her human dignity, the right to have that dignity respected, which arises from the right to dignity, can nevertheless be infringed upon; violations of this kind are held to be unconstitutional under Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution.

The inviolability of human dignity is reflected in its high and exceptional normative status. What is granted or at least intended is an absolute guarantee, which has neither exceptions nor legitimate restrictions. All other fundamental rights – including those referred to in the Constitution as 'inviolable' (Articles 4, 10 and 13) can and may be restricted under certain conditions. An intrusion into the scope of a protected fundamental right (*Schutzbereich*) does not necessarily constitute a violation of this right, but rather may be legally justifiable. Any such possibility of balancing or compromising between competing constitutional rights or values (*Verfassungsg¨uter*) is impossible under Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution. Every intrusion upon human dignity is inevitably a violation of the Constitution.6 Accordingly, the Federal Constitutional Court has repeatedly confirmed that human dignity can never be relativized or balanced against some other constitutional right or constitutional value.7

Any such violation of this constitutional principle – and this shows once again the exceptional status of the right of human dignity – could not even be made permissible by amending the Constitution. The reason for this is that Article 1 of the Constitution comes under the protective scope of the so-called 'eternity clause', namely, Article 79, paragraph 3, of the Constitution, which prohibits the

- 2 BVerfGE (German Federal Constitutional Court Decisions) 5 (1956) 85 (204); 50 (1979) 166 (175); 27 (1970) 344 (351).
- 3 BVerfGE 117 (2006) 71 (89).
- 4 BVerfGE 109 (2004) 279 (311); as well as BVerfGE 115 (2006) 118 (152).
- 5 Dreier 2013: para. 44 with further references.
- 6 This is the dominant view in the literature. For references, see Dreier 2013: para. 46; of course, there are an increasing number of opponents of this view: see Baldus 2011.
- 7 BVerfGE 93 (1995) 266 (293); 107 (2003) 275 (283f).

amendment of the principles included in Articles 1 and 20 of the Constitution. Certain acts, which would be considered violations of human dignity, are thus normatively prohibited for all eternity. Article 79, paragraph 3, of the Constitution declares restrictions impermissible. If certain practices or technologies, for example in human genetics, were found to encroach upon human dignity, their licensing in Germany would be completely impossible for all time. Human dignity arguments are 'winner arguments' (Bayertz 2010). This explains to a large extent the strong interest in how Article 1, paragraph 1, is interpreted within the discussions of bio-political issues, which are highly controversial not only due to their legal, but also their theological and philosophical aspects.

#### **Conflicts, consensus and concepts**

It is in this by no means ended debate that opposing positions have clashed with particular force. The one side held and still considers embryo research, preimplantation genetic diagnostics (PID) and therapeutic cloning to be flagrant violations of the right to human dignity, whereas the other holds these practices to be readily justifiable, for example by the freedom of research and the freedom to have children as well as other fundamental rights.8 However, it must not be overlooked that the lack of agreement here is only or at least essentially about the question of whether the un-individuated, not-yet-successfully-implanted pre-embryo is bearer of human dignity (*Tr¨ager der Menschenw¨urde*).9 Here, the clash between contrary positions continues, each resorting to elaborate argumentational strategies. For example, whilst advocates of embryo research and PID may point out that during the pre-implantation phase there still exists no individuated life, but only a species-specific one (*human life*, but not *a human being*) (Dreier 2013: paras. 82f), opponents insist that only the protection of life and human dignity from the very beginning avoids an arbitrary cut-off point (Hofling ¨ 2011: paras. 59f). There has been an undisputed consensus that the practices referred to above would be absolutely impermissible on living human beings after birth. This would constitute experimentation on humans or the arbitrary destruction of human life, which by general conviction would be as reprehensible as torture, stigmatization, human trafficking or slavery. This is at the same time also a list of some of the most obvious examples of the violation of human dignity.10 In more abstract terms, Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution protects against the most serious violations of the fundamental freedoms and the equality of all individuals.

It is a salient feature of these groups of cases that they are defined by an obvious violation of human dignity, and precisely because of their overwhelming

- 8 Representing the pro and contra positions in the various opinions of the German National Ethics Council (see German National Ethics Council 2003; 2004; 2007).
- 9 References for both opinions: Dreier 2013: paras. 82f.
- 10 References in Dreier 2013: paras. 60f, 138.

plausibility are supported by a broad consensus. To a certain extent human dignity is defined negatively by the establishment of a violation applying generally accepted criteria in the presence of relevant facts. So construed and narrowly defined, the legal principle of human dignity secures a generally accepted area of protection. The clear and narrowly defined scope of application guarantees the absolute nature of the right and the certainty of firm and clear boundaries.

This certainty is quickly shattered if one attempts to deduce general criteria for the existence of a violation of human dignity using the so called 'object formula'. According to this formula, human dignity is violated whenever the 'specific human being is degraded to an object, to a mere instrument, to a replaceable entity' (Durig ¨ 1956: 127). This formula can be traced back to Kant's prohibition of the instrumentalization of human beings. Its vagueness is, however, an easy gateway for partisan or subjective evaluations (Hilgendorf 1999: 146f; Dreier 2013: para. 55).

The differences become much sharper if one attempts to determine positively the meaning of the term 'human dignity' (rather than listing violations to define it negatively). Performance theories, for example, conceive human dignity not as something substantially existing but rather as something to be attained (Luhmann 1965: 68f). According to communication theories, human dignity is generated through a process of social recognition and reveals human solidarity as its core idea (Hofmann 1993: 364, 368).

#### **Extension, inflation, trivialization: banalizing a rule intended for exceptional situations**

Largely without extensive recourse to any of the approaches sketched out above, the concept of human dignity has been widely extended more than anywhere else in the jurisdiction of the Federal Constitutional Court. When Article 1, paragraph 1, was included in the Constitution of 1949 it was primarily understood as a protest against the 'unspeakable atrocities committed against humans by the totalitarian powers of the 20th century' (Hasso Hofmann), but in the meantime this right has developed further in a wide variety of ways. Aimed to apply in the most exceptional circumstances, and as an obvious bulwark against the totalitarian disregard of the rights of the individual, human dignity has become a right of almost ubiquitous application. It is applied to a wide variety of factual situations widely removed from the totalitarian disregard of human rights reflected in the massive violation of human dignity during the National Socialist and Stalinist periods. It is only a slight exaggeration to speak now of the tendency towards a universal application of human dignity. Three developments deserve particular attention.

First, the Federal Constitutional Court has in several decisions encouraged the idea that special fundamental rights written into the Constitution are all to be understood as concrete examples of the right to human dignity; human dignity constitutes the 'root of all fundamental rights'.11 The systematic relationship which exists between human dignity and the other fundamental rights, as reflected in the tiered structure of the three paragraphs of Article 1, is misunderstood in this way as describing a derivation of the various rights from this right. Moreover, the idea of a root suggests some mistaken conception that all fundamental rights in the Constitution are somehow connected to the right to human dignity. Similarly, the widespread ideas in the literature regarding an inalienable central value or core of human dignity contributing to all fundamental rights raise altogether more questions and problems than they answer (for critical analysis, see Dreier 2013: paras. 162f).

A different and much older train of thought which has likewise been strongly promoted by the Federal Constitutional Court is the creation of combined fundamental rights by linking a fundamental right to human dignity. The most important and indeed best known example of this is the general right of personality, derived from Article 1, paragraph 1 (human dignity), taken together with Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Constitution, which has appeared in a wide variety of different concrete expressions.12 It is noteworthy that the main problem of this and other combinations of rights is that human dignity, as an absolute right, is here linked to other rights which are subject to constitutional restrictions. Nobody is able to say exactly where the boundary is to be drawn between the absolutely protected core value (Article 1, paragraph 1) and the surrounding area (Article 2, paragraph 1) which is subject to restrictions. Court decisions in this area are quite diverse and are hard to predict because of the element of balancing of interests, sometimes going in one direction, sometimes the other, as reflected in the *Diary Entry Case* and the *Eavesdropping Case*. 13 As a result, the absolute character of the right to human dignity is evaporating in favour of a balancing procedure, as is frequently employed for other fundamental rights. Thus is exemplified the high price to be paid for human dignity finding its way into the everyday practice of law.

A third trend intensifies the extension to the point where it becomes an inflation. It bears the scars of trivialization when citizens start court proceedings to protect their right to human dignity in utterly insignificant cases of state interference or legal requirements such as the need to submit receipts for expenses, or wear a certain work uniform, subsequently going on to one or several appeals.14 It bears the scars of hasty recourse to human dignity by the courts themselves, when, in concrete cases requiring a balancing of rights,

- 11 BVerfGE 93 (1995) 266 (293); 107 (2003) 275 (284). Approved in BGHZ (German Federal Supreme Court Civil Cases) 149 (2001) 247 (262f).
- 12 See the numerous citations of cases in Dreier 2013: paras. 76, 140.
- 13 BVerfGE 80 (1989) 367; 109 (2004) 279; for a critical evaluation of the reasoning in both decisions, see Baldus 2011: 537f; for a discussion of the *Diary Entry Case*, see Dederer 2009: 114f.
- 14 For this and other examples, including references, see Dreier 2013: paras. 49, 50.

they abruptly resort to the highest constitutional value to decide the disputes. At the Federal Administrative Court (*Bundesverwaltungsgericht*) this applies particularly to the Senate dealing with cases coming from the armed forces (*Wehrdienst*), which has undoubtedly held in a particularly excessive manner that disciplinary measures for misconduct qualify as violations of human dignity. Furthermore, in the notorious *Peep-Show Case*, 15 the court first set aside the relevant provisions of the trading regulations before abruptly holding that the human dignity of the performers had been violated. In a very similar way, the highly criticized civil decision of the Federal Supreme Court (*Bundesgerichtshof*) in the *Living Wills Case* of 200316 held that many private law rules are derived from general constitutional rights such as human dignity. Similar examples of hasty recourse to Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution can also be found in criminal cases.17 Altogether, the impression becomes increasingly clear that the right to human dignity is used as a justification, or even in place of a justification, in order to give more force to one's own conclusions, potentially based on completely different arguments, to make the decision seem to have no alternatives because the highest constitutional principle to a certain extent governs or even requires the decision. Thus, the proud first clause of the Constitution threatens to become 'small change' in the day-to-day work of lawyers because of its ubiquity, universal application and omnipresence. Human dignity is in jeopardy of being used in a random fashion. The ever more frequent references to human dignity represent a threat to both its exceptional status in the legal order as well as its claim to prevail over all other rules. As elsewhere, inflation results in devaluation.

#### **Human dignity is pervasive in the German legal system: private law, criminal law, and administrative law**

These few examples of potentially exaggerated and not always legally wellfounded references to Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution should not be misunderstood as implying that the right of human dignity does not extend beyond the area of constitutional law. Although it may arguably be in need of stronger methodological control, it has very wide effects in Germany at the level of ordinary law, exerting itself over the entire legal system. This is due to the widely accepted constitutional doctrine of 'radiating effect' (*Ausstrahlungswirkung*), together with the legal maxims of 'interpretation in conformity with the Constitution' (*verfassungskonforme Auslegung*) and 'constitutionally oriented interpretation' (*verfassungsorientierte Auslegung*). Thus,

<sup>15</sup> BVerwGE 64 (1981) 274. There was very heavy criticism of this decision; for references, see Dreier 2013: para. 149 (also for subsequent case law changes).

<sup>16</sup> BGHZ 154 (2003) 205.

<sup>17</sup> OLG Frankfurt (Higher Regional Court Frankfurt) NJW 1997, 1647 (1648): 'Violation of human dignity via the administration of emetics to drug dealers'.

for example, sometimes ordinary laws are interpreted in light of human dignity; in many instances, human dignity is simply an element of the ordinary legal rule; and, finally, important dogmatic concepts are enriched by the idea of human dignity or are supplied with enhanced legal justifications. In the various fields of law the resulting picture differs significantly, as will be shown below.

In civil law, it is settled in both the case law and the legal doctrine which follows from it that (particularly) the general clauses (*Generalklauseln*) of the Civil Code (*B¨urgerliches Gesetzbuch*, BGB), may function as gateways for judgments that are made on the basis of constitutional law. This also applies in principle to human dignity, which has been used as the reference point for determining what is *contra bonos mores* under § 138 BGB, has helped define what is 'good faith' (*Treu und Glauben*) under § 242 BGB, and has largely been used for determining whether behaviour amounted to intentional damage contrary to public policy (*vors¨atzliche sittenwidrige Sch¨adigung*) under § 826BGB. Of course, the civil law's claims to autonomy are so strong that human dignity can hardly be found as a heuristic tool in legal treatises in this area. Nevertheless, use of the previously mentioned combined fundamental right of the general right of personality, with its almost incomprehensibly vast range of interpretations, is expanding. In the *Benetton Advertising Cases*, the Supreme Court stuck firmly to its assessment, holding that so called 'shock advertising' violated human dignity and was therefore *contra bonos mores* in the context of competition law.18 In the recent past, the most effective references to the right of human dignity were made, significantly, on a highly disputed ideological battlefield: the issue is referred to as 'child as damage'. This includes both *wrongful birth* and *wrongful life*. 19 It was in this context that a very rare public disagreement between the two chambers of the Federal Constitutional Court played out.20

Criminal law has proved to be an area of law which has always been strongly influenced by the principle of human dignity (Prittwitz and Manelodakis 1998). From the specification of certain acts as criminal offences, including justifications for criminalizing those acts, to the imposition of punishments, and then further to the implementation of sentences, human dignity has always played a pivotal role (Lagodny 2005; Dreier 2013: paras. 139f). It is considered to be one of the most important factors in the perception of the nature of criminal punishment and the relationship between guilt and atonement. The doctrine *nulla poena sine lege* has its place not only in the principle of *rule of law* and in Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Constitution, but also, or perhaps foremost, in the

- 19 For an overview, see Dreier 2013: paras. 158f.
<sup>18</sup> BGH (German Supreme Court) decision of 6 July 1995 – I ZR 180/94 = NJW 1995, 2492; BGHZ 149 (2001) 247 (259f). The German Federal Constitutional Court held repeatedly that there was no violation of Art. 1, para. 1, of the Constitution: see BVerfGE 102 (2000) 347 (366f); 107 (2003) 275 (283f).

<sup>20</sup> See BVerfGE 88 (1993) 203 (204) on the one hand, and BVerfGE 96 (1997) 375 (399f) on the other.

right to human dignity. The prohibition on compulsory self-incrimination (*nemo-tenetur-Grundsatz*), although not included in the actual text of the Constitution, is sometimes considered to be derived in part from Article 1 paragraph 1. One finds human dignity among the elements of some offences in the German Criminal Code (*Strafgesetzbuch*, StGB), for example § 130 StGB (incitement to hatred, *Volksverhetzung*) and § 131 StGB (dissemination of depictions of violence,*Gewaltdarstellung*). It also plays a role in laws on the protection of minors and in § 22 of the German Code of Military Justice (*Wehrstrafgesetz*, WStG). Furthermore, the term 'public morals' (*gute Sitten*) in § 228 StGB is a reference to Article 1, paragraph 1. Finally, the law on the enforcement of punishments, with its highest goal being rehabilitation, is thoroughly imbued with the concept of human dignity. The details of the implementation of punishment are governed, among others, by the consideration 'that the conditions for a dignified existence by the prisoner must continue to exist while he is held in custody and that the State is obliged to take the necessary steps to realize that objective'.21

The protection of human dignity is also one guiding principle for Germany's strong and sophisticated Social Law. This becomes particularly obvious when looking at the social security system which provides unemployment insurance benefits, welfare benefits and nursing care for the infirm, with the aim of giving the persons concerned the opportunity to lead a life 'consistent with the dignity of a human being'. Precise financial quantifications can, of course, not be derived from the text of Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution. Precise financial figures can similarly not be derived from the 'fundamental right to a decent minimum income', which the Constitutional Court held to exist under Article 1, paragraph 1, taken together with the principle of the social welfare state (*Sozialstaatsprinzip*) under Article 20, paragraph 1, of the Constitution.22 The absoluteness of these social guarantees has suffered to a certain extent because the amount of benefits granted is ultimately contingent both on economic factors as well as on social conditions (Bayertz 2010).

Public law, in particular special administrative law (*Besonderes Verwaltungsrecht*), presents itself as an extremely varied area of law in Germany. It is in this area of law that some of the most spectacular and always highly disputed cases, like the *Peep-Show Case* or *Dwarf-Tossing Case*, 23 have come to court. The main issue in the litigation of these cases is the construction of the general clause on public policy in the trade laws, more specifically *bonos mores* (*gute Sitten*) which is a gateway with a huge potential for involving daring

<sup>21</sup> BVerfGE 45 (1977) 187 (228); citation from BVerfG (decision of 13 November 2007, 2 BvR 939/07, para. 12). Compare the reasoning in BVerfGE 109 (2004) 133 (149f).

<sup>22</sup> BVerfGE 125 (2010) 175. For more detail, see Egidy 2011.

<sup>23</sup> On the *Peep-Show Case*, see note 15 above. On the *Live Dwarf Tossing Case*, see VG Neustadt NVwZ Administrative Court 1993, 98; see also Teifke 2011: 84f, for additional critical comments.

displays of one kind or another. Similarly, 'public order' (*offe ¨ ntliche Ordnung*) in risk prevention law (*Gefahrenabwehrrecht*) is a concept interpreted in light of human dignity. Examples of this are the *K¨orperwelten Case*24 (Body Worlds) which involved the public exhibition of plastinated cadavers and the *Laserdrome Case*25 and similar cases which dealt with death games. There were particularly intensive discussions of the right to human dignity in connection with tasteless television formats such as *Big Brother* and *Dschungelcamp*. One of the most difficult issues in all these cases proved to be whether participation by the subjects was really 'voluntary' (Dreier 2013: para. 149).

One has to remember that the quality of being 'tasteless' is not in itself automatically a violation of the right of human dignity under Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution, even if the show's participants engage in ridiculous, selfdegrading behaviour. It would be a misconception both of the deep historical and philosophical core of the right to human dignity as well as its exceptional nature to conceive of it simply as the highest normative substrate of paternalistic social morality or as a fixed pattern of social order. The danger always exists of misinterpreting human dignity as an objective value concept, pitting it against its actual foundations, namely, individual autonomy and self-determination over one's own life and the way the life is lived. It then mutates from a promise of freedom and equality for all persons into a rule giving the state the power to intervene in people's lives. This would lead to the opposite of what was intended.

#### **Concluding remarks**

Human dignity has a prominent and exceptional status in the legal order of the Federal Republic of Germany. It is exactly because of the absoluteness of its guarantee and the normative safeguard in Article 79, paragraph 3, of the Constitution (the 'eternity clause') that it is not only a wrong, but also a dangerous, strategy to apply the human dignity clause (Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution) as extensively as possible and to establish it as the decisive factor in court decisions in as many cases as possible. From the point of view of the 'rule of law', such use of human dignity as a 'perfect example of good order with universal application' (Christoph Enders) would lead to a dubious unsettling of settled areas of law. It would be equally intolerable if human dignity were taken to be the 'universal solution' (Rainer Wahl) suitable for dealing with all epochal developments like biotechnology and other processes of great social transformation. One should not fall victim to the dangerous belief that the

24 For the *K¨orperwelten Case*, see BayVGH (Bavarian High Administrative Court) NJW 2003, 1618 (1619f).

25 The Federal Administrative Court (*Bundesverwaltungsgericht*) viewed this as a violation of human dignity: BVerwGE 115 (2001) 189 (199f); BVerwG (decision of 13 December 2006, 6 C 17/06 para. 25). This has justifiably been viewed rather critically in the literature (Teifke 2011: 83f, with additional references).

solutions to complicated legal problems in commercial law or the clarification of urgent problems of the future always and only lie in a proper understanding of the inviolable Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Constitution. That would overrate the constitutional principle and underrate the capacity of a free, pluralistic society for individual and collective self-determination.

#### **References**

- Baldus, M. 2011. 'Menschenwurde und Absolutheitsthese', ¨ *Archiv des ¨offentlichen Rechts* 136: 529–52
- Bayertz, K. 2010. 'Menschenwurde', in H. J. Sandk ¨ uhler (ed.), ¨ *Enzyklop¨adie Philosophie*, new edn, 3 vols., vol. II. Hamburg: Meiner, 1553–8
- Dederer, H. 2009. 'Die Garantie der Menschenwurde (Art. ¨ 1 Abs. 1 GG): Dogmatische Grundfragen auf dem Stand der Wissenschaft', *Jahrbuch des ¨offentlichen Rechts* 57: 89–124
- Dreier, H. 2013. 'Art. 1 Abs. 1 GG', in H. Dreier (ed.), *Grundgesetz-Kommentar*, 3 vols, vol. I. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, paras. ¨ 1–168
- Durig, G. ¨ 1956. 'Der Grundrechtssatz von der Menschenwurde', ¨ *Archiv des ¨offentlichen Rechts* 81: 117–57
- Egidy, S. 2011. 'Casenote The Fundamental Right to the Guarantee of a Subsistence Minimum in the Hartz IV Decision of the German Federal Constitutional Court', *German Law Journal* 12: 1961–82
- Enders, C. 1997. *Die Menschenw¨urde in der Verfassungsordnung Zur Dogmatik des Art. 1 GG*. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck ¨
- Geddert-Steinacher, T. 1990. *Menschenw¨urde als Verfassungsbegriff: Aspekte der Rechtsprechung des Bundesverfassungsgerichts zu Art.1 Abs.1Grundgesetz*. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot
- German National Ethics Council 2003. 'Genetic Diagnosis Before and During Pregnancy', www.ethikrat.org/archive/national-ethics-council/opinions/opinions?set language=en (accessed 9 February 2012)
	- 2004. 'Cloning for Reproductive Purposes and Cloning for the Purposes of Biomedical Research', www.ethikrat.org/archive/national-ethics-council/opinions/ opinions?set language=en (accessed 9 February 2012)
	- 2007. 'Should the Stem Cell Law Be Amended?', www.ethikrat.org/archive/nationalethics-council/opinions/opinions?set_language=en (accessed 9 February 2012)
- Hesse, K. 1995. *Grundz¨uge des Verfassungsrechts der Bundesrepublik Deutschland*. Heidelberg: C. F. Muller ¨
- Hilgendorf, E. 1999. 'Die mißbrauchte Menschenwurde Probleme des Men- ¨ schenwurdetopos am Beispiel der bioethischen Diskussion', in B. Sharon Byrd ¨ *et al*. (eds.), *The Human Analyzed, Jahrbuch f¨ur Recht und Ethik 7*, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 137–58
- Hofling, W. ¨ 2011. 'Art. 1 GG', in M. Sachs (ed.), *Grundgesetz-Kommentar*. Munich: C. H. Beck, paras. 1–112
- Hofmann, H. 1993. 'Die versprochene Menschenwurde', ¨ *Archiv des ¨offentlichen Rechts* 118: 353–77
- Lagodny, O. 2005. 'Menschenwurde im Strafrecht am Beispiel der grundrechtlichen ¨ Legitimation staatlichen Strafens', in M. Fischer (ed.), *Der Begriff der Menschenw¨urde: Definition, Belastbarkeit und Grenzen*. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 65–77
- Luhmann, N. 1965. *Grundrechte als Institution*. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot
- Margalit, A. 1999. *Politik der W¨urde: Uber Achtung und Verachtung ¨* . Frankfurt am Main: Fischer
- Prittwitz, C., and Manoledakis, I. (eds.). 1998. *Strafrecht und Menschenw¨urde: Deutsch-Griechisches Symposium, Thessaloniki 1995*. Baden-Baden: Nomos
- Teifke, N. 2011. *Das Prinzip Menschenw¨urde*. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck ¨