### Martin Luther's conception of human dignity

OSWALD BAYER∗

Martin Luther's notion of human dignity is, in line with the entire Christian tradition, identical to the notion of humankind as the image of God (Gen. 1.26f). This at once determines the horizon within which Luther – critically – engages the corresponding notions of humankind as the image of God in scholasticism and mysticism, Renaissance philosophy and humanism (cf. Trinkaus 1970; Ebeling 1975: 320–4). With respect to his understanding of the idea of humankind as the image of God, Luther's most prominent document is the *Disputatio de homine* (1536), which discusses this understanding in light of the dispute between philosophy and theology (WA 39 I: 175–7).1 As becomes clear from a glance at thesis 20, the very first thesis announces how fundamentally controversial the basic anthropological notion is: 'Philosophy, human wisdom, defines human beings as endowed with the gift of reason, with senses and with corporeality' (WA 39 I: 175.3f).2 Following this classical determination of the human being as 'rational animal' or '*zoon logon echon*',3 which stems from the Aristotelian tradition, theses 2–19 contain a critical engagement with philosophical anthropology. According to Luther, theology, on the ground of its universal claim to truth, cannot restrict itself to moving within a religious domain nor can it simply integrate and subject itself to philosophical standards. As such, then, it is the nature of theology as an academic discipline – as critical reference to other universal claims to truth – to engage in conflict and dispute.

Thesis 20, contrasting itself to this flawed philosophical understanding, states: 'Theology, on the contrary, defines, from the fullness of its wisdom, humans as whole and perfect.' Luther offers – and this is the point of his understanding of human dignity – a doctrine of humankind that is grounded in the theology of justification through and through, and is defined by the core statement (thesis 32): 'In Romans 3[:28], "For we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law", Paul briefly summarizes the definition of humankind

<sup>∗</sup> Translated by Naomi van Steenbergen. References to Luther are to the page numbers in the Weimar edition of his collected works ('WA'). Details of English translations are given in the bibliography at the end of the chapter.

<sup>1</sup> A magisterial commentary on this disputation is Ebeling 1982.

<sup>2</sup> The original Latin has been translated throughout this chapter.

<sup>3</sup> Aristotle, *Politics* I 2, 1253a 1–3; a 9f.

in the statement that humankind is justified by faith (*hominem iustificari fide*).' This means that humankind – any human without exception – is, without any merit or any worth that he could grant himself or expect from other humans as recognition, unconditionally and absolutely recognized and valued by his creator, redeemer and perfecter. This means that he has an inviolable and indestructible dignity. Since this dignity is not conferred on him by any human person, no human being can deny it to him.

This definition of human beings and their dignity, grounded in the theology of justification presupposes and implies that humans cannot be spoken of only in an abstract and isolated manner in terms of the theology of creation, but must be considered in three irreducible respects. Humans are first of all creatures; second, they are those who have corrupted their creation and have – of their own accord, yet not in the eyes of God! – invalidated and lost their dignity altogether (Romans 3:23);4 and, third, they are those who have been redeemed by Jesus Christ from the corruption of their creation. Theses 21–23, which in the Latin original form one single sentence, correspond to these three aspects, expressing their threefold trinity: 'The human is God's creation, consisting of flesh and living soul, from the outset made in God's image without sin, destined to rear offspring and rule over the created things and never to die.' This creature 'has, however, after Adam's fall, become subject to the power of the devil, subject to sin and death – both evils that cannot be conquered by his power, and that are eternal'. This creature 'can only be saved and gifted eternal life by the Son of God, Jesus Christ (insofar as he or she believes in Him)'.

The same state of affairs is emphasized in Luther's understanding of human dignity, under the heading of 'freedom', in two other prominent documents: the treatise 'On the Freedom of a Christian' (1520) and in its companion piece and complement 'On the Unfreedom of the Will' (1525), the great polemic pamphlet against Erasmus and his conception of human dignity. Both writings can be very briefly summarized in the following way: Luther's eminent interest in human freedom is a general anthropological interest insofar as what is at stake applies to the constitution and dignity of every human being. As such, it is, however, a deeply soteriological interest: it addresses salvation and doom, the gaining or loss of life. The human being is perceived as a sinner: as a creature that controverted its original freedom by abusing it and therefore – of his accord – forfeited and lost his likeness to God (Romans 3:23). In this radical sense his will is unfree, a *servum arbitrium*. He regains and receives his freedom only through Jesus Christ, who grants and conveys it to him in a new creation; it is the new, definitive freedom 'that Christ has secured for him and given him', that is, nothing but Christian freedom (WA 7: 20.26f; cf. 29.13–18).5 For this reason, the freedom of humans is concretely the freedom of a Christian. He who is not

4 On this matter, see Johannes von Lupk ¨ e's (2010) exceedingly rich and astute 'Ebenbild im Widerspruch'.

5 'Von der Freiheit eines Christenmenschen' (On the Freedom of a Christian/On Christian Freedom), 1520.

a Christian is, with respect to the will in the roots of his existence, unfree. He lives in contradiction to his destination, yet still, in the eyes of God, has not lost his likeness to God and his dignity as creature, and is recognized by the Law and the Gospel. In the domain of secular justice, the *iustitia civilis*, even the sinner can serve the law if he uses his reason – which in this domain is not a 'whore' (cf. Bayer 2008: 160, n. 17) but 'almost something divine' (WA 39 I: 175.9f)6 – 'as if no God existed' (WA 15: 373.3).7

According to the central thesis 32 of the *Disputatio de homine*, what makes humans human is the fact that they require justification of their existence through faith – this need is their dignity. The dignity of humans, their being, is their fundamental dependence on life and on what is necessary for life being bestowed anew in every second 'against all danger' (Bekenntnisschriften der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche 1998 511.1f)8 – something they cannot maintain even for a moment in and for themselves. The ontological depth and breadth of being justified through faith, then, is: living an existence that is not deserved, but merely owed. Luther summarizes this central point of the theology of creation and its anthropology in his explanation of the first article of the creed in a way that explicitly refers to the theology of justification: 'I believe that God created me together with all creatures . . . without any merit or any dignity in me' (Bekenntnisschriften der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche 1998 510.33–511.5). He has, as it were, created me into a dignity without dignity. Anyone who acknowledges this expresses for himself and on behalf of the entirety of creation that all creatures owe their existence to causeless benevolence and mercy, entirely undeserved: *ex nihilo*, from nothing and nothing again – without any dignity in and of themselves. The dignity of human beings and their environment is not intrinsic, but – as unconditionally and absolutely bestowed and maintained – extrinsic. It is not a quality that inheres in humans and their world, but a relational notion: it exists only by virtue of and with respect to their creator, redeemer and perfecter. The dignity of human beings is conferred and guaranteed only by the triune God.

While, for Luther, human beings have their dignity first and foremost *amongst* their fellow creatures,9 Luther makes very clear that humans also *differ from* them, by virtue of their gift of language and reason, through which they are 'most distinguished from other animals' (WA DB 10/I: 101, 14f).10 This has its basis in the duty of stewardship (Genesis 1.26–8) with which humankind as the image of God is intrinsically connected. Luther cannot praise this gift of

- 6 Ratio as 'divinum quiddam'. Cf. LW 34: 37 (thesis 4).
- 7 Exposition of Psalm 127, for the Christians at Riga in Livonia, 1524.
- 8 *Small Catechism*, explanation of the first article of the creed.
- 9 This observation would have to be the starting-point of an explanation of the way in which non-human creatures have dignity as well. In any case, it is impossible for a theology of creation such as Luther's to simply affirm the Kantian privileging of humans, and view, for instance, animals as 'things' without dignity. Cf. Bayer 2007: 44–56: 'Human Life in the Midst of Life that Loves Living', 55f.
- 10 Second Preface to the Psalter, 1528.

language and reason granted to humankind highly enough. Despite sin, reason functions as the 'inventor and guide of all [liberal] arts, of medical science, jurisprudence and all that humans in this life have in terms of wisdom, power, competence and glory' (WA39 I:175,11–13).11 For 'even after Adam's fall, God did not take away, but rather affirmed this majesty', the duty of stewardship (*ibid*.: 20f).12 In the secular realm, the reason gifted to and expected of humankind is 'a sun and a sort of divine power, given in this life to govern all of these things [medical science, jurisprudence, etc.]' (*ibid*.:18f).13 Here, reason is the 'inventor', indeed the 'guide' (*ibid*.: 11),14 ruler, queen – much as the rational human being who rules over the world remains a needy and receiving child *vis-`a-vis* his creator: child and king in a personal union (Psalm 8). The human autonomy is grounded in the interweaving of fundamental passivity and subsequent activity, being loved and recognized from the outset. Within the boundaries of mere *iustitia civilis*, reason is aware not only of its limits, but also of its regal power and, not in the last place, of its ability to be a danger to itself. Relying like children upon their creator, redeemer and perfecter, humans are liberated from absolutisms, and thus enabled to have a sober sense of what is possible and necessary within this world and within history.

In this domain of the *iustitia civilis*, humans have – in contrast to the domain of *iustitia dei* – a free will, a *liberum arbitrium*: the freedom to choose, decide and act, to which the Augsburg Confession devotes an entire article (Article 18): 'On the free will'. 'The free will is taught in such a way that humans do in a certain respect have a free will in order to live a life that is outwardly respectable and to choose amongst the things that are understood by reason' (Bekenntnisschriften der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche 1998 73.1–5) – amongst the things that are 'subordinate' to it:15 the organization of relationships in marriage, family, economy, education and culture, law and state.

Luther's distinction between *iustitia dei* and *iustitia civilis*, as well as the distinction between *servum arbitrium* in relation to God and *liberum arbitrium* in relation to the secular affairs, corresponds to the distinction between God's spiritual and secular rule gained from his transformation of Augustine's doctrine of the two *civitates*. Luther's standpoint is classically expressed in the 1523treatise 'On Secular Authority, How Far the Obedience Owed to It Extends' (WA 11: 245–81).16 This distinction characterizes Luther's conception of human dignity and points out its social-ethical significance, which cannot be overestimated. If the dignity of human beings depends only on and is conferred only by their creator, redeemer and perfecter, then it is detached from any human

<sup>11</sup> Disputatio de homine, thesis 5. 12 Thesis 9. 13 Thesis 8. 14 Thesis 5.

<sup>15</sup> *Ibid.*: 'De libero arbitrio [ecclesiae apud nos] docent, quod humana voluntas habeat aliquam libertatem ad efficiendam civilem iustitiam et deligendas res rationi subiectas.'

<sup>16</sup> Cf. LW 45: 81–129 ('Temporal Authority: To What Extent It Should Be Obeyed'). Cf. Bayer 2008: 313–18.

disposition – not in the last place from the mandate of secular authority. The task of the secular authority, the state, is therefore to respect and protect the undeserved dignity of humans that is apprehended by faith (or, which is the same, through the freedom of conscience). Nobody can be forced to believe, for faith is a free endorsement of the heart inspired by inner spirit. 'Since in this case', the second part of the treatise on authority reads, 'it is up to every individual's conscience how he believes or doesn't believe, and [since] this does not derogate secular power, [the secular authority] should be contented and attend to its [own] task and allow people to believe this or that, whatever they can and want to, and not pressure anyone with violence. For faith is a free work, to which nobody can be forced.'17

This in no way means though, that faith is a private affair, which it understandably became in modern times (cf. Bayer 2007: 138–55). Since it stems from the 'word that is flesh' (Bekenntnisschriften der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche 1998 58: 12f),18 the word – and thus faith – must have room and be protected in the public sphere established by the state. If the state, as happens in situations of totalitarianism, interferes with this sphere that is constituted by word and faith, with God's 'spiritual' regimen, it should be – passively – resisted. The competencies and powers of the state are clearly limited; for this reason, it should be asked and heeded 'to what extent' the state is owed obedience. For 'we must obey God rather than man' (Acta 5.29).19 In this way, Luther's ingenious distinction between God's 'spiritual' and 'secular' regimens functioned as an antidote against later absolutism and against the totalitarian systems of the twentieth century20 and became one of the roots of the modern basic right to freedom of religion and conscience.21 The modern distinctions between both religion and politics and morality and right, cultural achievements whose value can hardly be over-estimated, are not conceivable without Luther's distinction between God's spiritual and secular rule and the corresponding limits on state power for the sake of religious freedom on the one hand and, on the other, limits on the powers of the church and clergy in the public sphere for the sake of

- 17 'Temporal Authority' (see note 16 above), WA 11, 264.16–20 (including context). That 'nobody can' (or ought to) 'be compelled to Christianity' was already argued by Augustine (*Epistolae*, libr. II, ep. XCIII). Unfortunately neither Augustine nor Luther was consistent in heeding this insight.
- 18 Augsburg Confession, Art. V.
- 19 Art. XVI (Bekenntnisschriften der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche 1998 [70f], 70.23–26).
- 20 A prominent example in which the element of authority critique of Luther's two regiments doctrine is drawn upon for legitimating resistance to a totalitarian regime is the Norwegian Church Conflict 1942. Cf. Bayer 2008: 312f.
- 21 Against Georg Jellinek's (1895) thesis, which attributes freedom of religion directly and solely to the English reformation, see the convincing argument in Heckel 1987. Heckel shows that the current distinction between religion and politics is essentially derived from Luther.

a reasonable secularity in the realm of civil society and state action. In the fifth thesis of the Barmen Declaration (1934), this inheritance is expressed clearly: 'We reject the false doctrine that the state should or could, beyond its specific task, become the single and total order of human life and thus fulfil the task of the church as well. We reject the false doctrine that the church should or could, beyond its specific task, take up the manner, tasks and worth of the state and thus become an organ of the state itself' (Burgsmuller and Weth ¨ 1983: 38).

According to Luther, human dignity, which is identical with the nature of humans as the image and likeness of God, is warranted only by the triune God: the creator, redeemer and perfecter of humans and the world around them. The explicit recognition of this warranty cannot be presupposed in a pluralistic society and in a religiously neutral state. It can, however, anonymously, become a placeholder (one that can and must be interpreted) for the absoluteness and unconditionality expressed in Article 1, paragraph 1, of the German Constitution as the criterion for any positive right: 'The dignity of human beings is inviolable.' An indication of the hidden theological ground of this criterion may be found at the start of the Preamble to the German Constitution: 'Conscious of their responsibility before God . . . '.

#### **References**

Aristotle. [350 BCE]. *Politics*

- Augustine. 1930. *Saint Augustine: Select Letters*, trans. J. H. Baxter. Cambridge, MA: Loeb Classic Library
	- 2004. *The Works of Saint Augustine, a Translation for the 21st Century: Part 2 Letters*, trans. B. Ramsey. Hyde Park, NY: New City Press
- Bayer, O. 2007. *Freedom in Response: Lutheran Ethics: Sources and Controversies*. Oxford University Press
	- 2008. *Martin Luther's Theology: A Contemporary Interpretation*. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans
- Bekenntnisschriften der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche. 1998. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck ¨ & Ruprecht
- Burgsmuller, A., and Weth, R. (eds.). ¨ 1983. *Die Barmer Theologische Erkl¨arung: Einf¨uhrung und Dokumentation*. Neukirchen: Neukirchener Verlag
- Ebeling, G. 1975. 'Das Leben Fragment und Vollendung: Luthers Auffassung vom Menschen im Verhaltnis zu Scholastik und Renaissance', ¨ *Zeitschrift f¨ur Theologie und Kirche* 72: 310–36

1977, 1982, 1989. *Lutherstudien*, 3 vols. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck ¨

- Heckel, M. 1987. 'Die Menschenrechte im Spiegel der reformatorischen Theologie', in *Gesamtausgabe*, vol. 2, ed. K. Schlaich. Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, ¨ 1122–93
- Jellinek, G. 1927. *Die Erkl¨arung der Menschen- und B¨urgerrechte: ein Beitrag zur modernen Verfassungsgeschichte*. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot
	- 1982. *The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of Citizens: A Contribution to Modern Constitutional History*, trans. M. Farrand. New York: H. Holt
- Luther, M. 1883–1966. *Martin Luthers Werke, Kritische Gesamtausgabe*, 73 vols. Weimar: Verlag Hermann Bohlaus Nachfolger (WA) ¨
	- 1955–76. *Luther's Works*, ed. J. Pelikan and H. T. Lehmann. St Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House
- *The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church*. 2000. trans. and ed. by R. Kolb, T. J. Wengert and C. P. Arand. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press
- Trinkaus, C. 1970. *In Our Image and Likeness: Humanity and Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought*, 2 vols. London: Constable
- Von Lupke, J. ¨ 2010. 'Ebenbild im Widerspruch: Menschenwurde und Menschenrechte ¨ im Spiegel der Erzahlung vom Brudermord (Gen ¨ 4.1–16)', in *Der Mensch als Thema theologischer Anthropologie: Beitr¨age in interdisziplin¨arer Perspektive*, ed. J. van Oorschot und M. Iff. Neukirchen: Neukirchener Verlag, 114–45