### Dignity and global justice

THOMAS POGGE

Dignity is not an independently existing thing, but an attribute – of human beings, for example. It is essential to our notion of dignity that it has two distinct but related meanings. Using one meaning, we say that each human being has an inherent dignity, which is inalienable and equal for all. Using the other meaning, we say that the dignity of human beings is precarious and stands in need of social protection.

We find both meanings used side by side in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). In the first three occurrences of the word, it is used in its first sense:

recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world (UDHR, Preamble, paragraph 1)

the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women (UDHR, Preamble, paragraph 5)

[a]ll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights (UDHR, Article 1)

In the next occurrence, 'dignity' is used in its other sense:

Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization, through national effort and international cooperation and in accordance with the organization and resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality. (UDHR, Article 22)

To call these rights indispensable for dignity is to say that any person lacking in these rights also falls short in dignity. Article 22 thus suggests that dignity is both alienable and possibly unequal: those who have dignity can lose its indispensable preconditions and therefore dignity itself – and will then not be 'equal in dignity' with those who still have it.

One can clarify the link between the two senses of 'dignity' by examining how the UDHR treats the closely related notion of rights or human rights. Article 22 suggests that every human being has certain rights, but also that these rights stand in need of realization. A group of frightened children, caught in the midst of a terrible bombing campaign, do not enjoy their human 'right to life, liberty and security of person' (UDHR, Article 3), and yet they still have this right in the sense that they ought to enjoy it. Here, we might say that the realization of a human right (globally, or within some jurisdiction) involves the achievement of secure access to its object (for all human beings, or for those within this jurisdiction). To call X a human right is to say that secure access to X must be established and maintained for human beings – which imperative persists even, and especially, when the right is not realized.

Calling X a human right also implies that it is *for the sake of the human beings having this right* that secure access to its object ought to be maintained. Any responsibilities or duties we may have in regard to the realization of a human right are duties owed to those who still lack secure access to its object. Thus, those who violate human rights are wronging those whose rights they are violating – rather than merely disobeying God, for example, or disturbing the harmonious order of the cosmos.

Tying these thoughts together, to say that every human being has dignity in the first sense is to say (a) that she or he has the potential for dignity in the second sense and (b) that the realization of this potential – a life with dignity – is of great moral importance. A human being can lead such a life only if she or he has secure access to certain essentials, that is, only if her or his human rights are fulfilled. It is therefore of great moral importance to ensure such fulfilment. When a human right is fulfilled for all, then we may say that it is fully realized (worldwide, or within some jurisdiction).

There are three dimensions in which a human being may fall short of a life with dignity. The first involves greatly inferior social standing and excessive subordination to others. Many people live under such conditions of indignity: being ordered about, ridiculed, humiliated, slapped in the face, terrified, not in control of their dress or appearance (naked in front of strangers) and perhaps adapting to such conditions with servility, flattery or self-abnegation. US treatment of captives at Abu Ghraib provides a comprehensive range of examples of how people can be stripped of their dignity. Similar fates are suffered, less dramatically, by much larger numbers of people worldwide: by domestic servants, factory workers and wives in many countries, by refugees and prisoners, by people trafficked for prostitution or labour, and also by patients in hospitals and nursing homes, enlisted soldiers, and pupils unpopular with their peers.

The second dimension of (in)dignity involves care of one's physical self. This dimension is related to the first in that it is humiliating to appear in public clothed in rags, smelling of urine or covered with skin lesions or eczema. But these dimensions are separable nonetheless. Even when a person has little or no contact with others, she may take care of herself through proper personal hygiene, a healthy diet and regular physical exercise – or she may be unable or unwilling to do so and then become a fit object for pity or disgust for herself and for others.

The third dimension of (in)dignity involves a person's inner or mental life. Here, dignity is especially closely associated with self-control. It is undignified to be overwhelmed by low emotions and desires such as envy, greed, hunger, lust, anger or pride. It is undignified to lack cognitive or executive powers: to be highly forgetful, for instance, or unable to pursue mildly complex tasks. And it is undignified to be held back by laziness or weakness of the will.

There are in principle two ways in which human dignity can be protected or maintained in these three dimensions. One involves a change in human psychology such that what was perceived or experienced as indignity comes to be seen as consistent with the full dignity of human beings. Society may, for instance, be or become fully accepting of people with speech impediments, of ethnic minorities, of women, or of people with an artificial anus. This path to dignity is not always workable for either of two reasons. In some cases, psychological reactions can at best be mitigated. Thus, it may be impossible to wholly eliminate feelings of disgust in response to certain skin diseases or incontinence problems. In other cases, such a psychological adjustment of how we conceive human dignity would be morally unacceptable. Thus, even if torture could be thoroughly professionalized – administered perhaps through machines remotely operated by emotionally uninvolved technicians focused on the extraction of information – we should still have to judge it a grievous affront to the dignity of the person screaming in pain. And even if there were wide cultural acceptance of conduct driven by strong emotions of greed or lust (as has indeed existed in some societies), we should still want to maintain our judgment that this is conduct to be left behind.

These empirical and moral limits of cultural adjustment indicate our social task: to structure human life, insofar as reasonably possible, so that all human beings can live in dignity. The three dimensions of indignity suggest the indispensable presuppositions to be socially secured. First, human beings must have a protected standing within their social world that allows them to avoid excessive dependency on others and to defend themselves against humiliation and abuse. The human rights specified in Articles 3–21 of the UDHR are especially relevant to protecting this component of human dignity. Second, human beings must have the education, income and social services they need to take proper care of their bodies through adequate nutrition, clothing, shelter, sanitation, clean water, physical exercise, rest and medical care. This component of human dignity is protected especially in Articles 22–27. Finally, human beings should also have access to the ennobling achievements of humanity: to literature and music, sports and science, and to the exploration of other species and our natural environment. Here, again, appropriate education is crucial, as is access to museums, libraries, academic institutions, theatres, movies and other cultural facilities and community activities. It is through the encounter of others and their achievements that human beings reach their full potential.

Dignity is different from those many things and attributes that are valuable insofar as they are valued. Such conferral of value presupposes a certain value in the conferrer. One person's appreciation may confer value on a musical performance even while another's lust confers no value on his encounter with a prostitute. The human capacity to confer value depends on our potential for dignity. Respect for this potential requires respect for dignity – one's own and that of others. By depriving someone of dignity, one is then demeaning not merely something valuable but a precondition of value.

This complexity can be integrated into a conception of morality as aiming to maximize value by protecting human capacities to confer value and human opportunities to do so. Such a consequentialist conception might instruct us to sacrifice the dignity of some in order to enhance the capacities or opportunities of others. Typically, however, those who give a central place to dignity in their moral thinking resist such trade-offs. They deny that one may sacrifice the dignity of some for the sake of multiplying valuable activities, or even protecting the dignity, of many others. This is not tantamount to the assertion that human dignity must never be sacrificed, no matter what. It does affirm, though, that the value of dignity transcends the value it confers on human activities and that the non-violation of dignity is of greater moral importance than its promotion.

One need not take sides on this dispute to conclude that current global institutional arrangements constitute a massive and wholly unjustifiable violation of human dignity. Shaped in negotiations among the world's most affluent and powerful agents, these arrangements maintain and aggravate vast social and economic inequalities that force half of humankind to subsist in conditions of severe deprivation, as is dramatically documented in the latest statistics regarding social and economic human rights. Among 7.1 billion human beings, 868 million are chronically undernourished, 884 million lack access to safe water, 2.5 billion lack access to basic sanitation, 2 billion lack access to essential drugs, over 1 billion lack adequate shelter, and 1.6 billion lack electricity; 775 million adults are illiterate and 215 million children are child labourers. Roughly one-third of all human deaths, 18 million annually, are due to such poverty-related deprivations, easily preventable through better nutrition, safe drinking water, cheap re-hydration packs, vaccines, antibiotics and other medicines (Pogge 2010a: 11–12). Most human beings do not have 'a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of oneself and of one's family, including food, clothing, housing, medical care and necessary social services' (UDHR, Article 25).

We see that this ongoing catastrophe is avoidable from a single figure: the poorer half of humanity has been reduced below 3 per cent of global household income. This progressive marginalization of the poor is long-standing and ongoing. Between 1988 and 2005, the richest one-twentieth of humanity has raised its share of global household income from 42.9 to 46.4 per cent, to well over nine times the global average income. The bottom half (ten times as many people) saw its share decline from 3.5to 2.9 per cent or 1/17 of the global average income. Losses were greatest in the bottom quarter, whose share declined by one-third: from 1.16 to 0.77 per cent or 1/32 of the global average income. The eradication of all severe poverty would require a shift of no more than 1.75 per cent of global household income – half of what the richest twentieth gained in recent years.

In conjunction with such vast inequalities, extremely low incomes (in the region of US\$10–30 per person per month) also undermine the civil and political human rights of those in the poorer half. To meet their most basic needs, many feel obliged to commit themselves or their children into various forms of slavery or debt bondage, into beggary or into jobs of extreme dependency, exploitation or servility. And, in most cases, the people of a 'less developed' country are politically disempowered by an oppressive and corrupt 'elite' that ignores their needs, imposes huge national debts upon them, and sells their natural resources to foreigners in exchange for the arms it needs to stay in power.

The world's affluent mostly manage to remain ignorant of the magnitude of global poverty: of the scandalous contrast between the enormous death toll and humiliation it produces and the minuscule shift in global income needed for its eradication. Those who understand the true proportions admit that they should be doing more, but most feel only slight unease in regard to their perceived moral imperfection. Few understand that the massive poverty the affluent fail to alleviate is poverty they cause and aggravate through institutional design decisions in which they prioritize their own comparatively trivial interests over the most basic needs of the majority of humankind.

The terms of the WTO Agreement reflect the pressure powerful firms in the affluent countries exert towards continued and asymmetrical protections of their markets through tariffs, anti-dumping duties, export credits and huge subsidies to domestic producers. Such protectionism greatly impairs export opportunities for the poorest countries and regions. If the WTO proscribed protectionist barriers against imports from poor countries, their populations would benefit greatly: export revenues would be higher by hundreds of billions of dollars each year, hundreds of millions would escape unemployment, and wage levels would rise substantially (Pogge 2010b: 183–4).

Powerful firms have also successfully insisted that their intellectual property rights – ever-expanding in scope and duration – must be vigorously enforced in the poor countries. Music and software, production processes, words, seeds, biological species and medicines – for all these, and more, rents must be paid to the corporations of the rich countries in exchange for (still multiply restricted) access to their markets. Millions would be saved from diseases and death if generic producers could freely manufacture and market life-saving drugs in the poor countries (Pogge 2010a: 20–1).

While the WTO requires all member states to legislate strong intellectual property protections, its rules do not constrain working conditions or labour rights and thereby engender a race to the bottom in which poor countries, to attract investment, compete by offering workers that are even more exploitable and mistreatable than those elsewhere. Hundreds of millions bear the consequences in the form of inhuman working conditions: incredibly long periods without breaks or vacations, assaulted by dust, dirt, noise, heat and pollution, and terrified by supervisors who can fine, punish, harass or fire them on a whim.

To be sure, the ruling elites of poor countries – together – could better protect their populations. They predictably fail to do this because they have more to gain from serving the interests of rich foreign firms and governments. Most have little need for domestic popularity, relying instead on an important international convention according to which rulers – merely because they exercise effective power in a country and regardless of how they acquired or exercise such power – are entitled to confer legally valid property rights over the country's resources and to dispose of the proceeds of such sales, to borrow in the country's name and thereby to impose debt service obligations upon it, to sign treaties on the country's behalf and thus to bind its present and future population, and to use state revenues to buy the means of internal repression. Such recognition accords international resource, borrowing, treaty and arms privileges to many governments unworthy of this title. These privileges are impoverishing, because their exercise often dispossesses a country's people who are excluded from political participation as well as from the benefits of their government's borrowing or resource sales. These privileges are oppressive because they give oppressors access to the funds they need to keep themselves in power even against near-universal popular opposition. And these privileges are disruptive because they provide strong incentives towards the undemocratic acquisition and exercise of political power, resulting in frequent coups and (civil) wars in the developing world.

Humanity's technological-economic capacities now easily suffice for the avoidance of all severe poverty. But global institutional arrangements keep half of humanity in continuous anxiety: oppressed and humiliated, unable to take proper care of themselves and their families, and constantly preoccupied with making ends meet. These global rules do not arise spontaneously; they are carefully designed in protracted negotiations among powerful governments, acting with the approval of their citizens, and those in a position to lobby such governments. These privileged agents do not hate the poor and wish them no harm; they merely act rationally, in a competitive game, to enhance their own power and affluence. But they knowingly deny all human beings our fundamental right 'to and social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration can be fully realized' (UDHR, Article 28). Such conduct constitutes a double denial of dignity. It denies the poor the preconditions of a life in dignity by depriving them of secure access to the objects of their human rights. And it denies that the poor have moral standing, that their unfulfilled human rights furnish reasons that must be given their due weight in the design of global institutional arrangements.

#### **References**

- Pogge, T. 2010a. *Politics as Usual: What Lies Behind the Pro-Poor Rhetoric*. Cambridge: Polity Press
	- 2010b. 'Responses to Critics', in A. Jaggar (ed.), *Pogge and His Critics*. Cambridge: Polity Press, 175–250