---
title: "A Lack of Respect in Bioethics"
author:
  name: "Samuel J. Kerstein"
booktitle: "Respect: Philosophical Essays"
editor:
  - name: "Richard Dean"
  - name: "Oliver Sensen"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
year: 2021
pages: "252–269"
citation_key: "Kerstein2021_Bioethics"
keywords: ["bioethics", "respect", "medical ethics", "moral philosophy"]
abstract: |
  [To be completed] This chapter discusses instances where respect is lacking in bioethical practices and the implications thereof.
---

### <span id="page-270-0"></span>**[A Lack of Respect in Bioethics](#page-8-0)**

### *Samuel J. Kerstein*

In bioethics, appeals to respect for autonomy are ubiquitous. To cite just a few examples, they feature in debates regarding the moral permissibility of markets in human organs, the legitimacy of paternalism in the doctor/patient relationship, and the ethics of clinical research. As some have put it, bioethics, at least in the United States, has a "near obsession with autonomy" (Emanuel, Wendler, and Grad 2000: 2701).

In a sense widely employed in the field, to respect a person is to respect her autonomy; it is, roughly, to facilitate or at least not hinder informed and voluntary choices she makes and actions she takes. Another sense of respecting a person plays a less prominent role in bioethics. In this sense, to respect a person is roughly to respect the worth *in* her. Honoring the worth in a person can, in morally important ways, be distinct from honoring her autonomous choices regarding what is good *for* her. This chapter will try to show that under-emphasis or neglect of a principle of respect for the worth of persons impoverishes bioethical debate.

The chapter unfolds as follows. First, I examine briefly some prominent specifications of the notion of respect for persons as respect for their autonomy: the notion that has been prevalent in US bioethics discourse for the past several decades. I then (section 2) present a different account of respect for persons, namely, a Kantian account of respect for persons' worth. I try to demonstrate that appeal to this account can enrich ethical debate in three areas: physician-assisted dying (section 3), the distribution of scarce, life-saving resources (section 4), and procreation section 5). My main claim is not that bioethical debate has been devoid of consideration of respect for the worth of persons. It is, rather, that in several domains, debate would profit from a great deal more attention to this notion of respect.

### **1. Respect in Bioethics**

The Belmont Report (United States National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research 1978) strives to identify the basic ethical principles that should govern research involving human subjects. One expert characterizes the report as "one of the few documents that has influenced almost every sphere of activity in bioethics" (Beauchamp 2008: 154). The report highlights three principles: beneficence, justice, and respect for persons. It describes beneficence as an obligation to secure well-being. This principle grounds an obligation on the part of researchers to try to minimize the risk to study participants. The report conceives of justice as requiring fairness in distribution of benefits and burdens—an example of a burden being participation in risky research. Respect for persons, according to the report, incorporates two moral requirements: "the requirement to acknowledge autonomy and the requirement to protect those with diminished autonomy" (Part B: 1).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Regarding the first requirement, to have autonomy a person must be able to deliberate regarding her goals, and to use this deliberation to guide her action. To respect a person's autonomy is to "give weight to" her considered opinions and choices and to refrain from obstructing her actions, unless these actions are "clearly detrimental to others" (Part B: 1). To exhibit lack of respect for a person's autonomy is, without compelling reason, to deny her the freedom to act on her considered judgments or withhold information necessary for her to make them. It is, therefore, no surprise that, according to the report, the principle of respect for persons helps to generate the requirement that subjects participate in research only if they give their informed consent to do so.

The second requirement that the principle of respect for persons incorporates, according to the Belmont Report, is to protect from harm those with diminished autonomy, for example, very young children or adults with profound mental disabilities. In the context of research, respect for persons requires that third parties take on the role of protecting individuals in these groups. The third parties should be those "most likely to understand the incompetent subject's situation and to act in that person's best interest" (Part C: 1). The report also specifies that if those with diminished autonomy are nevertheless able to make choices, their objections to participating in research "should be honored, unless the research entails providing them a therapy unavailable elsewhere" (Part C: 1). The Belmont Report does not specify how to resolve tensions between the three principles it mentions. And it does not specify that any one of the principles has lexical priority over any of the others (Childress et al. 2005).

Another centerpiece of contemporary US bioethics is the *Principles of Biomedical Ethics* (Beauchamp and Childress 2013), originally published in 1979. Beauchamp and Childress helped compose the Belmont Report, and their work has a similarity in structure. They specify four moral principles that, they say, form a suitable starting point for biomedical ethics, including, but not limited to, research ethics. These principles, which they find in "the common morality," are respect for autonomy, non-maleficence, beneficence, and justice (Beauchamp and Childress 2013: 13). Beauchamp and Childress envisage the principles as guidelines for formulating more specific rules, for example, regarding ethical requirements for the recruitment of research participants. The principle of respect for autonomy is a norm of "respecting and supporting autonomous decisions." The principle of non-maleficence prescribes "avoiding the causation of harm." The principle of beneficence is a group of norms that have to do with "relieving, lessening, or preventing harm and providing benefits and balancing benefits against risks and costs," while the principle of justice is a collection of norms for "fairly distributing benefits, risks, and costs" (Beauchamp and Childress 2013: 13). No one of the four principles has lexical priority over any other, Beauchamp and Childress emphasize. Each of them can be overridden when their prescriptions conflict with those of other moral principles.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Beauchamp and Childress's work incorporates a principle of respect for autonomy, rather than respect for persons. Since, they suggest, the principle of respect for autonomy is a norm of respecting and supporting autonomous choices or actions, understanding the norm requires grasping their vision of such choices or actions. For ease of expression, I here focus on actions. A person acts autonomously if she acts intentionally, with understanding, and without controlling influences that determine her action.1 For someone's behavior to amount to an intentional action, it must correspond to her conception of it. If she has no mental representation of her behavior, or a significantly skewed one, then it is not intentional. Someone acts with understanding only if she has at least a basic notion of the nature and consequences of what she is doing. If a patient believes that after she donates a kidney another one will grow back and replace it, then she does not comprehend what she is doing. Examples of controlling influences inconsistent with acting autonomously are coercion by another (external control) and obsessive desires symptomatic of severe mental illness (internal control).

The principle of respect for autonomy incorporates both negative and positive obligations, according to Beauchamp and Childress. As a negative obligation, they say, it requires that "autonomous actions not be subjected to controlling constraints by others" (Beauchamp and Childress 2013: 107). So, for example, respect for autonomy would presumably require not interfering with a patient's autonomous choice to cease a life-sustaining treatment. As a positive obligation, the principle requires "both respectful treatment in disclosing information and actions that foster autonomous decision making" (Beauchamp and Childress 2013: 107). Respect for autonomy thus requires, for example, that medical professionals help patients grasp, at least roughly, what their undergoing a surgical procedure would involve for them as well as a range of possible outcomes of their undergoing it.

In sum, while Beauchamp and Childress do not include among their fundamental principles one that prescribes respect for non-autonomous human beings, the Belmont Report does. According to the report, respect for persons requires that we protect such human beings from harm. In what follows, I focus mostly on persons who possess autonomy. The Belmont Report and the *Principles of* 

*Biomedical Ethics* provide fundamentally the same account of what it means to respect these persons. According to both, respect for autonomous persons involves non-interference with and facilitation of their making choices and taking actions that are voluntary and informed. In other words, respect for autonomous persons amounts to respect for their autonomous choices or actions.

### **2. A Kantian Account of Respect for the Worth of Persons**

Debate in bioethics is impoverished, I believe, if it fails to invoke another notion of respect for persons, including for fully autonomous persons. This notion is one of respect for the worth of persons. Three examples will, I hope, illustrate the loss incurred by a failure to give this notion its due. But to begin, let me sketch an account, albeit an incomplete one, of what it would mean to respect the worth of persons.

Elsewhere I have developed a Kant-inspired account of respect for the worth of persons (Kerstein 2013: 125–134).2 Before presenting this account, which I refer to as "RWP," some preliminary remarks are in order. First, RWP does not contain jointly necessary and sufficient conditions for honoring persons' worth; it is intended merely to shed light on much, but not all, behavior that fails to do so. Second, RWP is not to be taken as a categorical imperative commanding us to refrain from all conduct that would fail to respect someone's worth. Whereas Kant presumably holds that such conduct is always wrong, all things considered, RWP specifies merely a *pro tanto* wrong. It is consistent with RWP to hold, as I do, that we always have strong reasons to respect the worth of a person, but that these reasons might be outweighed by other reasons. An action might not respect the worth of a person, according to RWP, yet in my view be morally permissible, all things considered. For example, as should soon be evident, it would fail to respect the worth of a person according to RWP to refrain from saving his life and personhood in a tragic situation in which one had to choose between doing that and preventing quadriplegia in thousands of people (assuming that quadriplegia would not truncate their existence as persons). But it is consistent with RWP to hold, as I suspect many of us do, that failing to respect the person's worth is morally permissible, all things considered.

An abridged version of RWP, which is sufficient for our purposes, is as follows:3 The worth of persons is a special status that they possess by virtue of having the capacities constitutive of personhood. This status is such that:

- 1. A person ought not to use another merely as a means. This first aspect of persons' special status is lexically prior to the second aspect.
- 2. If a person treats another in some way, then she ought to treat him as having unconditional, preeminent value.

An agent's treatment of a person respects the worth of that person only if it accords with the special status just described.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

RWP requires clarification on several points. This is not the place to investigate in detail how to specify the notion of persons in RWP. But here is a Kantian account, put forth as a proposal open to modification. A being is a person only if it has the capacities to: set and pursue ends; strive for coherence among its ends; be self-aware; conform its actions to practical rules that specify means to ends; and act in accordance with a moral imperative. By a moral imperative, I mean a rule that someone sees as requiring her to do certain things even if, she judges, refraining from doing them would better promote her immediate satisfaction or overall happiness. Moreover, to count as a person a being must not only possess but have exercised the capacity Kant seems to associate most directly with humanity: the capacity to set and pursue ends. If a being fulfills all of the conditions mentioned above, then it is a person. The account incorporates a broad interpretation of what it means to possess a capacity. According to the account, for example, a typical toddler has the capacity to act in accordance with moral imperatives given that, if her development proceeds as expected, she will be able to do so. But a being who, practically speaking, cannot and will not be able to exercise one or more of the capacities is not a person. In principle, a living being from another planet or a non-living artifact such as a sophisticated computer might possess all of the capacities constitutive of personhood. A human being who has died or is alive but whose cerebrum can no longer function is not a person in the sense of the term employed here since he can, practically speaking, no longer exercise the capacities. I will not try here to answer the question of precisely when, in the course of its development, a typical human being becomes a person. If human embryos and first- or second-trimester fetuses do not engage in goal-directed activity, then they are not persons. If infants do engage such activity, as appears to be the case (Woodward and Gerson 2014), then they presumably are persons. Finally, personhood is here meant to be a threshold concept. If one has the features constitutive of it, one has personhood, no matter how well- or ill-developed those features may be.

Second, I defer until our discussion of physician-assisted suicide (section 3) a sketch of the notion of treating others merely as means embedded in RWP. But let me now make a couple of points. The mere means constraint in RWP applies only to using *persons*. If, as we are assuming, embryos are not persons according to RWP, then this constraint does not apply to their use. Second, to treat someone *merely as a means*, an agent must treat the person *as a means*: she must *use* that person. On my understanding, an agent uses another if and only if she intentionally does something to or with the other in order to realize her end, and she intends the presence or participation of the other to contribute to the end's realization. Below (section 4) we discuss choices regarding which candidates for a scarce, lifesaving resource receive it. In refraining from choosing a particular candidate, say,

because, if treated, she stands to have lower quality of life than another would if he were treated, we might be acting wrongly. But we would not be treating the candidate we do not choose merely as a means; for we would not be using her at all.

RWP specifies that every person has a status such that if an agent treats him in some way, then she ought to treat him as having unconditional, preeminent value (2). According to the concept invoked in RWP, something has unconditional value only if there are no conditions, actual or possible, under which it exists but lacks value. Moreover, if a particular being possesses unconditional value, this value does not vary on the basis of its intelligence or talents, its instrumental value to others, or the magnitude of its health-related quality of life, personal satisfaction (i.e., happiness, in one sense of the term), or well-being. Its value also does not vary on the basis of its impersonal value, that is, the value that an impartial rational spectator would assign to it.

To say that an unconditionally valuable being of a particular kind has preeminent value is to say that no amount of anything that is not a being of that kind can have a value equal to or greater than a being of that kind. Let us assume that persons have unconditional value. To say that they also have preeminent value is to imply that no amount of anything that is not a person can equal the value of a person. It is to imply that persons have a value that transcends that of non-persons. Part of holding that an unconditionally valuable being has preeminent worth is, according to our concept of such worth, to hold that if one treats the being in some way, this treatment ought to reflect that the being has such worth. If the treatment also reflects that the being has or lacks (or promotes or hinders) any conditional value, it must be consistent with what the treatment would be if it did not reflect the latter.

An agent treats another person as having unconditional, preeminent value, according to RWP, if and only if, in the given context, the action she performs is among those that she might perform if she reasonably believed her action to be successfully and absolutely constrained by her holding the other to have this value (as the value is defined above). The notion of reasonableness at work here is non-moral. What it is reasonable for an agent to believe is what the evidence available to the agent favors, given the information she has, her education, her upbringing, and so forth. An agent would not be treating another person as having unconditional, preeminent value if she kills him solely in order to prevent some third party from losing half of his inheritance (assuming, plausibly, that it is not reasonable for the agent to believe that money has unconditional worth). This action is not among those that she might perform if she reasonably believed what she did to be constrained by her holding persons to have unconditional, preeminent worth. The third party's balance sheet is obviously not the same thing as his personhood; a person who is poorer than he otherwise might be is still a person. But the one the agent kills is no longer a person.

Personhood or, equivalently, the capacity of rational choice, is something over and above a particular exercise of this capacity. In order to avoid failure to respect the worth of persons according to RWP, agents typically need not promote, or even refrain from thwarting, a person's particular exercise of his capacity of rational choice. Among the ways of treating another that, an agent might reasonably hold, sometimes accord with the notion that persons have Kantian worth would be, for example, her denying the other's request for career guidance or defeating the other in an election. However, it would typically not be reasonable to believe that diminishing someone's overall capacity to exercise her rational nature (for example, by luring her into heroin addiction) would harmonize with holding persons to have unconditional and preeminent worth.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **3. Physician-Assisted Dying**

A central claim of this chapter is that principles of respect for persons' worth, principles like RWP, have not gotten the attention they merit in bioethical debate. As an initial illustration, consider debate regarding physician-assisted dying—in particular, voluntary active euthanasia. In a paradigm case of voluntary active euthanasia, a competent patient makes a voluntary and persistent request to a physician for help in dying. The physician administers a lethal dose of medication because the patient cannot do so herself (Brock 1992). Our focus will be on the question of the moral permissibility of physicians doing this and what appeal to a notion of respect for the worth of persons adds to debate surrounding this question.

According to Dan Brock, the main ethical argument for the moral permissibility of voluntary active euthanasia unfolds as follows. First, we judge that patients have a moral right to determine whether to initiate or continue life-sustaining treatment. So, for example, an octogenarian patient has a right to refuse to be put on a respirator, even if he will soon die if left to breathe on his own.

Second, the basis of our judgment that patients have this moral right is an appeal to the values of autonomy and well-being. We think it important to respect autonomous decisions, especially choices regarding the manner and timing of one's death. On Brock's conception, valuing autonomy or, as he sometimes says, self-determination, seems to amount to essentially the same thing as respecting autonomy, according to Beauchamp and Childress's principle. In addition, Brock's argument continues, we think that a person's forgoing or ceasing medical treatment might result in her having a better life overall (i.e., a higher level of wellbeing) than she would have if she extended her existence. We believe, Brock suggests, that a competent patient is herself well positioned to determine whether it would be better for her if her life ended sooner rather than later. He says that "there is no objective standard, but only the competent patient's judgment of whether continued life is no longer a benefit" (Brock 1992: 11).

Third, according to Brock's argument, the same grounds that support the idea that patients have a moral right to forgo or cease life-sustaining treatment also ground the idea that they have a moral right to a lethal injection. Here Brock understands this moral right not as a right some patients have actually to receive such an injection, but rather as a right they have not to be interfered with if they choose to get one and find a physician willing to administer it. Brock is not claiming that doctors have a duty to administer death-inducing drugs. In any case, Brock asserts, if we value patients' autonomy and their well-being, then we should embrace the idea that some patients have a moral right not to be interfered with in their quest to get a lethal injection from a physician and, to focus on our main concern, the idea that physicians have a moral right to give such injections if they choose.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Brock's reasoning suffers from a shortcoming that stems from its invoking a notion of respect for the autonomy of persons, without also invoking a notion of respect for the worth of persons, or so I will try to show with the help of an example.4 Suppose that an aging but healthy poet reasonably believes the following: His poetry, which explores themes of violence and redemption, is deep and important, but underappreciated. The most efficient and perhaps the only way to draw significant attention to his work, which is by far the most important thing to him in his life, is for him to die a violent, "premature" death. Moreover, according to the poet, if he dies with the reasonable conviction that his poetry will be recognized for its true worth, his life will go better for him overall than if he lives it out in the routinely productive, but melancholy and interpersonally unrewarding, ease to which he has become accustomed. The poet is unable to shoot himself, so he asks an acquaintance to do it. He offers the acquaintance impeccable evidence that he is mentally competent and persistently renews his request. The acquaintance shoots and kills the poet.

The values Brock invokes in his defense of voluntary active euthanasia support the idea that the acquaintance's killing the poet is morally permissible. In shooting him, the acquaintance respects the poet's autonomy. Moreover, the acquaintance plausibly holds that his action promotes the poet's overall well-being. Just as, according to Brock, it is reasonable for physicians to do regarding competent, but critically ill patients, the acquaintance defers to the poet's judgment regarding what is best for him. It would not be hard to multiply examples in which people who are not terminally ill competently judge, as does the poet, that their lives would as a whole be better for them if they died sooner rather than later.

Many of us, I venture, reject the idea that the acquaintance's killing the poet is morally permissible. Our rejection of it is not (or not primarily) based on the killing's current illegality or on the likelihood that making actions like that of the acquaintance legal would result in unacceptable levels of abuse. Echoing David Velleman (Velleman 1999), we hold, rather, something like the following: The acquaintance acts wrongly because although he respects the poet's autonomous pursuit of what is good *for him*, he fails to respect the worth *in him*. Referring back to RWP, the acquaintance fails to treat the poet's rational nature as having unconditional, preeminent worth. The poet's capacity of rational choice is something over and above his particular exercise of it in pursuing the end of promoting the goodness for him of his life as a whole, it is reasonable for the acquaintance to believe. In effect, the acquaintance runs afoul of RWP by treating the worth in the poet as having less weight than the value of what is good for him.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

The example of the poet aims to illustrate implausible implications of Brock's reasoning that stem from its neglect of a notion of respect for the worth of persons. Granted, the context of Brock's argument is end of life decision-making. He has foremost in mind physicians' bringing about the deaths of terminally ill patients, and the poet is not terminally ill. But his argument, to the extent that it is effective, supports the view that a patient's terminal illness is *not* a necessary condition for the moral permissibility of a physician's giving her a lethal injection. If the values of self-determination and well-being support the moral permissibility of assisted dying in cases of terminal illness, then they also support its moral permissibility in cases in which someone is not terminally ill. As the aging poet case helps to illustrate, it would be implausible to assume that death promotes a person's overall well-being only if the person is terminally ill, especially if, as Brock suggests, we defer to competent individuals to make judgments regarding wherein their well-being lies.

Appeal to a Kantian notion of respect for the worth of persons helps explain why many of us reject the idea that it is morally permissible for the acquaintance to shoot the poet. Moreover, I believe that this appeal helps explain why some of us find morally problematic some current practices in the realm of assisted dying (Kerstein 2019a). For example, some of us have moral qualms regarding euthanasia as practiced in the Netherlands where, in order to legally euthanize competent patients who request it, doctors have to certify that their suffering is "unbearable," with no prospect of improvement, but not that they are terminally ill (Lerner and Caplan 2015). While this practice might respect patients' autonomous pursuit of what is good for them, it seems in some cases to ignore a special value in them. In my view, the notion of respect for this value should feature in debate on the moral permissibility of voluntary active euthanasia, even though it does not settle this debate.

Someone might reject the idea that we should invoke the notion of respect for the worth of persons, specified in RWP, when assessing the moral permissibility of physician-assisted dying. The objector might claim that doing so comes at an unacceptable cost, namely, that of having to embrace the implausible idea that it is disrespectful of the worth of persons and thus wrong, at least *pro tanto*, for health professionals to withhold or withdraw personhood-sustaining treatment at their patient's voluntary request.

This objection reflects an inadequate understanding of RWP. According to RWP, respect for the worth of persons requires that we refrain from treating them merely as means. This requirement is lexically prior to the requirement that we treat persons as having unconditional, preeminent worth. On my account, if a person uses another, she uses him merely as a means if it is reasonable for her to believe that the other can neither consent to her use of him nor share the proximate end(s) she is pursuing in using him (Kerstein 2013). A person cannot consent to be used in some way if he cannot avert the use simply by dissenting from it. And a person being treated as a means to some end cannot share this end roughly if it would be prudentially irrational for her to pursue it. In a typical mugging, for example, we would say that the mugger treats his victim merely as a means. The mugger uses the victim to get her money. But it is reasonable for the mugger to believe the following: The victim can't avert this usage simply by telling him (the mugger) not to engage in it. Moreover, the victim cannot, from the standpoint of prudential rationality, share the mugger's end; for if the victim pursued it, she would be willing to be thwarted in the pursuit of her own ends (e.g., to buy a movie ticket that evening).

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Now if a physician ignores a patient's voluntary, competent request to forgo an intervention, she typically treats the patient merely as a means, thereby failing to respect his worth. Through undertaking or continuing a medical intervention, the physician uses the patient to accomplish her end, say, that of preserving a patient's life. But it is reasonable for her to believe neither that the patient can prevent this use simply by dissenting from it, nor that he can share her end. It isn't reasonable for the physician to believe that the patient can share her end because, in light of his request, it isn't reasonable for her to believe that he could, rationally speaking, will her end without thereby subverting an end of his own, such as that of not undergoing the intervention she has in mind. RWP does not entail that a physician has a *pro tanto* reason to do something (e.g., force a patient into a lifesustaining treatment) when doing so amounts to treating the patient merely as a means. We can appeal to a Kantian account of respect for the worth of persons in connection with the debate on physician-assisted dying without having to embrace the idea, which many find implausible, that a physician would be acting *pro tanto* wrongly in honoring a patient's autonomous request to forgo lifesustaining treatment.

One last point: Those committed to a Kantian notion of respect for the worth of persons arguably need not hold that physician-assisted dying fails to respect this worth in all cases. Velleman, for example, suggests conditions under which a doctor's taking a patient's life would be consistent with Kantian respect for the worth of persons (Velleman 1999). On my own view, which I will not defend here, it can be respectful of the worth of a person's capacity of rational choice to help him die if this capacity is, as it were, permanently exhausted by single exercise of it—if, in other words, his condition is such that he is and will be capable of setting and pursuing only one end: to die.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **4. Distribution of Scarce, Life-Saving Resources**

A second area in bioethics that would profit from more attention to a principle of respect for the worth of persons is that of questions concerning the morally legitimate allocation of scarce, life-saving resources. For example, how can we, morally speaking, decide who does and who does not gain access to potentially life-extending but scarce resources such as flu vaccine, intensive care beds, or organs for transplantation?

In this area, unlike that of physician-assisted dying, theorists do not typically appeal to a principle of respect for the autonomy of persons. Perhaps they simply make the background assumption that all of the candidates for a life-saving resource have either themselves autonomously chosen to vie for it or, as in the case of very young children, had surrogates do so on their behalf. So, the theorists might think that appeal to a principle of respect for autonomy will not help assign priorities to various candidates. Theorists, I suspect, tend to suppose that "respect for persons" amounts to respect for autonomy. Therefore, a principle of respect for the worth of persons oftentimes fails to figure even in the background of their discussion of the distribution of scarce, life-saving resources.

Here I illustrate this lack of consideration of respect for the worth of persons with the help of one recent discussion. Carl Tollef Solberg and Espen Gamlund have suggested that in allocating scarce, life-saving resources we ought to consider how bad death would be for those who would die if left untreated (Solberg and Gamlund 2016: 8). We have moral reason, they suggest, to prioritize persons for whom death would be very bad over persons for whom it would be less bad (or not bad at all). Solberg and Gamlund argue that the badness of death for a person typically peaks at around ten years of age. At around that age persons typically have "complete ownership" of their future and a great deal of well-being ahead of them, if they continue to live. Solberg and Gamlund suggest that among the principles that play a role in the distribution of scarce, life-saving resources we should include one that prescribes minimizing the badness of death for (currently existing) candidates for scarce, life-saving resources.

Further details of Solberg and Gamlund's views need not concern us here.5 For our purposes, we need note merely that they mention a whole array of possible allocation principles. Some subset of them, they suggest, needs to enter along with that of minimizing the badness of death into allocation decisions. Two of these are the principles youngest first and modified youngest first. Youngest first is straightforward—it gives priority to younger candidates for scarce, life-saving resources over older ones. Modified youngest first prioritizes persons roughly between fifteen and forty years old over younger children and older adults, for example, seventeen-year-olds over five-year-olds. Solberg and Gamlund also mention a principle of societal value, which apparently favors people who are more productive and have dependents over those who are less productive and lack dependents (Solberg and Gamlund 2016: 3). In addition, they invoke a "greater benefit" principle, according to which "resources should be accorded to the intervention with the greater health benefit," as well as a fair innings principle, which says that "resources should be directed to those who have not yet had their fair share of life" (Solberg and Gamlund 2016: 3). Solberg and Gamlund mention these other principles, but they do not make clear which of them they would endorse or how conflicts between principles should be adjudicated.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

Even a cursory look at these six principles reveals that, intuitively speaking, none of them captures the content of a principle of respect for the worth of persons. The principles obviously yield inconsistent allocation recommendations in some cases (for example, youngest first can clash with modified youngest first), but in others they yield consistent ones. And sometimes, when they yield consistent recommendations, these are in tension with the recommendations that a principle of respect for the worth of persons would presumably make.

Consider the Paraplegia Case, inspired by Frances Kamm (Kamm 2009: 161–162): Our job is to distribute a scarce, life-saving resource in a morally permissible way. We have enough of this resource to give candidate A or candidate B, but not both, an additional ten years of life. B would spend those years in full health. However, as a side effect of the treatment, A would be paraplegic, significantly reducing her quality of life (health-related and otherwise). Other things are equal between them—for example, they are both twenty years old, and they have had equally good pasts regarding their health.

Since the candidates are the same age, the youngest first, modified youngest first, and fair innings principles fail to apply, making it trivially true that they yield consistent recommendations (i.e., none at all). And we can assume that the societal value principle would favor neither candidate. The greater benefit principle would clearly favor the person who would get ten years in full health over the one who would get ten years as a paraplegic. Solberg and Gamlund's principle of minimizing the badness of death among candidates for scarce, life-saving resources, also implies that we ought to save B, the one who would be nonparaplegic, straightaway. We assume that A and B have complete ownership of their future. (It is not the case that either one would be cut off, psychologically speaking, from her pre-treatment self.) But since there is more well-being in prospect for B—if, treated, she would not become paraplegic—B's death would be worse for her than A's death would be for A. So, taken together, the set of principles Solberg and Gamlund mention would have us save B straightaway.

Many of us, I believe, would reject this recommendation and insist that A and B ought to get equal chances. Intuitively speaking, a principle of respect for the worth of persons would imply that they should. And that's just what we find when we apply RWP to the case.6 It would be incompatible with RWP for us to save B straightaway, basing our choice on the expectation that B would have higher health-related quality of life or greater well-being. That is not among the actions someone might in this context perform if he reasonably believed his action to be successfully and absolutely constrained by his holding persons to have unconditional, preeminent worth. A's paraplegia does not affect his status as a person, according to RWP. Moreover, according to the concept embedded in RWP, an unconditionally valuable being's worth does not increase or decrease based solely on its level of health-related quality of life, personal satisfaction, or well-being. As far as RWP is concerned, A has just as much worth as B.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

We might nevertheless be tempted to embrace the notion that it would be consistent with RWP to save B straightaway in order to maximize benefits. B's being non-paraplegic would not at all raise his worth as a person. However, there would be more value as a whole in B's surviving, namely, his worth as a person plus his high health-related quality of life for ten years, than there would be as a whole in A's surviving, namely, his worth as a person plus his lower health-related quality of life for ten years, we might assert. Why would it not be consistent with RWP to use B's greater health-related quality of life as a kind of tiebreaker between A and B?

Suppose we save B straightaway on the suggested grounds, giving A no chance whatsoever to receive life-saving aid. We could not reasonably believe that our action was constrained by our holding persons to be unconditionally and preeminently valuable. To hold that an unconditionally valuable being has preeminent worth is, in part, to hold the following: if one treats the being in some way, this treatment ought to reflect that the being has such worth, and if the treatment also reflects that the being has or lacks (or promotes or hinders) any conditional value, it must be consistent with what the treatment would be if it did not reflect the latter. But B's higher prospective health-related quality of life is a conditional value, according to the Kant-inspired notion of such value. There are conditions in which B's being non-paraplegic would not be good, for example, if it enabled him to grievously harm others. If the conditional value of B's higher prospective health-related quality of life did not figure into our decision of whom to save, we would, in treating persons as having unconditional, preeminent value, choose based on a random procedure in which each candidate gets a 50 percent chance. We surely would not abandon both A and B. But saving B straightaway on the grounds that he, unlike A, will survive in full health is, of course, inconsistent with giving A and B equal chances.

Let me end this section with two points. I have appealed to Solberg and Gamlund's work as an illustration of what is a widespread, but not universal (see, for example, Kamm 2009) neglect of a principle of respect for the worth of persons in bioethical debate regarding the allocation of scarce, life-saving resources. But it is easy to find other examples of this neglect. In an article entitled "Principles for Allocation of Scarce Medical Interventions," Govind Persad, Alan Wertheimer, and Ezekiel Emanuel discuss eight such principles before setting forth their "complete lives system," which includes five principles (Persad, Wertheimer, and Emanuel 2009). A principle of respect for the worth of persons gets no mention. Second, I do not claim that a principle of respect for persons suffices on its own to determine morally legitimate prioritization of candidates for scarce, life-saving resources. As the authors just mentioned, I believe that in the end we will need to appeal to several principles. A principle of respect for the worth of persons needs to be among them.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **5. Procreation**

Philosophers working on the ethics of procreation pose the question of what, if anything, justifies bringing a child into existence, given that existence involves hardship (e.g., failure, pain, loneliness) and that a child does not consent to be born. In this realm, like that of physician-assisted dying and the distribution of scarce, life-saving resources, Kantian thinking regarding respect for the worth of persons has something to offer.

But before explaining what, let me emphasize that the Kantian account presented above sets forth jointly necessary conditions for respecting the worth of persons who do exist (and, perhaps, have existed), not for respecting persons in prospect. An individual cannot now respect or fail to respect the Kantian worth of a future person; for since the future person does not yet exist, she has no such worth.7 At the time procreation occurs, for example, the time a woman becomes pregnant, she is not respecting or failing to respect the worth of the person she produces; for the zygote that emerges within her is not a person, according to the account sketched above.

My focus here is on reasons for procreation. Reflection on the worth of persons, which, according to Kantians, demands respect, enables us to see a kind of reason for procreating that seems lost in some contemporary bioethical debate.

For a brief illustration of this point, consider David DeGrazia's work on procreative ethics.8 According to DeGrazia, two and maybe three considerations justify procreation when it is justified: "(1) procreative freedom, a central interest of prospective parents; (2) the interests of the child brought into being; and possibly (3) the impersonal value of bringing more net good into the world" (DeGrazia 2012: 155).

DeGrazia seems to assert regarding (1) that since prospective parents have an important interest in having the option to procreate, there is *pro tanto* moral reason to allow them to do so if they so choose. (1) seems to be a consideration in favor of *not interfering* with parents' procreation, that is, a notion of respect for parental autonomy, rather than a consideration that justifies procreation itself. Perhaps it is the parents' important interest in procreation that counts as a consideration in its favor, according to DeGrazia's considered view. Regarding (2), DeGrazia suggests that the prospect of a child's having a life that, without delusion, the child will come to endorse as good overall, in terms of her well-being, can help justify procreation. DeGrazia considers but does not commit to the idea that the impersonal value of bringing more net good into the world, (3), is a consideration that justifies procreation when it is justified. In any case, the good he refers to is well-being or what is good for some individual (DeGrazia 2012: 158–159). The idea is that, from an impartial point of view, procreation might increase the net amount of happiness in the world and derive some justification from doing so.

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

In my view, DeGrazia's notion of considerations that can contribute to justifying procreation suffers from a salient omission. According to the Kantian account sketched above, we must treat persons as having a special worth in them, which is distinct from the value of their lives in terms of happiness (i.e., the value of their lives for them). Now, as I have said, prospective persons do not exist, and so do not have such worth. However, parents' idea that in procreating they will produce a *person*, a being that has a very special status, constitutes a consideration that can help justify procreation, or so it seems to me. If the notion that a future child will have a life that is good for him can count as a justifying reason for producing him, then so can the idea that a future child will have a special worth inherent in him.

Of course, in objecting to DeGrazia's position I do not intend to imply that it would, according to RWP, be disrespectful of the worth of persons for potential parents to refrain from producing children. RWP's scope does not extend to persons in prospect. I am asserting simply that the idea of producing beings with a special status can help justify parents' procreative actions.

### **Conclusion**

I have tried to show that bioethical debate in three realms would be enriched by consideration (or greater consideration) of a Kantian principle of respect for the worth of persons. I am not claiming that appeal to the particular principle I propose, or indeed to any particular Kantian principle of respect for the worth of persons, suffices to resolve issues in these domains. But ignoring such Kantian principles amounts, I believe, to ignoring a rich vein of ordinary moral thinking. Beauchamp and Childress claim to find their principle of respect for autonomy in "the common morality," that is, roughly, in the set of norms shared by persons committed to morality (Beauchamp and Childress 2013: 3). If it is plausible to hold that respect for autonomy stems from this source, is it not also plausible to hold that something like a Kantian principle of respect for the worth of persons does so as well? Debate concerning issues of respect in bioethics should focus not only on respect for persons' autonomous pursuit of what is good for them but also, and to greater degree than heretofore, on respect for what is good in them.9

**OUP CORRECTED AUTOPAGE PROOFS – FINAL, 30/03/21, SPi**

### **Notes**

- 1. Although this notion of autonomous action has been influential (see, for example, Schüklenk et al. 2011: 33), bioethicists differ, of course, on the accounts they embrace. On an alternative account (of roughly the sort suggested in DeGrazia 2005), a person's action is autonomous if and only if she is acting on some preference of hers and, based on reflection on her values, she either does or, if she thought about it, would choose to have this preference even in light of understanding how it arose in her.
- 2. In Kerstein 2013, I refer to this account as a Kant-inspired account of respect for the worth or, equivalently, for the dignity of persons. But I avoid use of the term "dignity" here. In bioethical contexts, this term has been used in so many ways, and sometimes with such vagueness, that invoking it can hinder fruitful debate. For a valuable account of uses of "dignity" in bioethics as well as a suggestion that respect for dignity is not exhausted by respect for autonomy, see Schulman (2008).
- 3. For a complete statement, see Kerstein (2013: 127–128).
- 4. This difficulty is not limited to Brock's defense of the morality of physician-assisted suicide. One also finds the difficulty in more recent defenses. Schüklenk et al. (2011: 38), for example, base theirs on appeal to autonomy alone.
- 5. For detailed criticism of their views, see Kerstein (2019b).
- 6. One might worry that RWP would also yield the following conclusion: Two candidates for a life-saving resource that can go to only one must get equal chances even when the only salient difference between the candidates is that, if treated, one would gain two years of life as a person, while, if treated, the other would get fifty years. I argue that this worry is misplaced (Kerstein 2015).
- 7. Granted, through an action he takes now, an individual might ten years from now fail to respect the worth of someone who does not yet exist. The individual might do that, for example, if he sets a bomb on a ten-year timer, intending that it explode and kill the occupants of a particular building, and some of the occupants were not yet born when he placed it. But we can set such cases aside.
- 8. Elsewhere I criticize some of David Wasserman's (Benatar and Wasserman 2015) views on procreation from a similar perspective (see Kerstein 2020).
- 9. Thanks to Richard Dean and students in my bioethics seminar for their help on this essay. Some material in this essay stems from my work listed in References.

### **References**

Beauchamp, Tom, 2008. "The Belmont Report." In: *The Oxford Textbook of Clinical Research Ethics*, ed. Ezekiel Emanuel, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

- Beauchamp, Tom L. and Childress, James F., 2013. *Principles of Biomedical Ethics*, 7th edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Benatar, David and Wasserman, David. 2015. *Debating Procreation: Is It Wrong to Reproduce?* Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Brock, Dan, 1992. "Voluntary Active Euthanasia." *Hastings Center Report* 22 (2): 10–22.
- Childress, James, Meslin, Eric, and Shapiro, Harold, 2005. *Belmont Revisited: Ethical Principles for Research with Human Subjects*. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
- DeGrazia, David, 2005. *Human Identity and Bioethics*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- DeGrazia, David, 2012. *Creation Ethics: Reproduction, Genetics, and Quality of Life*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Emanuel, Ezekiel, Wendler, David, and Grad, Christine, 2000. "What Makes Clinical Research Ethical?" *JAMA* 283 (20): 2701–2711, doi:10.1001/jama.283.20.2701.
- Kamm, Frances, 2009. "Aggregation, Allocating Scarce Resources, and the Disabled." *Social Philosophy and Policy* 26: (1): 148–197.
- Kerstein, Samuel, 2013. *How to Treat Persons*, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Kerstein, Samuel, 2015. "Dignity, Disability, and Lifespan." *Journal of Applied Philosophy* 34 (5): 635–650.
- Kerstein, Samuel, 2019a. "Hastening Death and Respect for Dignity: Kantianism at the End of Life." *Bioethics* 33 (5): 591–600.
- Kerstein, Samuel, 2019b. "The Badness of Death for Us, the Worth in Us, and Priorities in Saving Lives." In: *Saving People from the Harm of Death*, ed. Espen Gamlund and Carl Solberg, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Kerstein, Samuel, 2020. "Procreation and Intellectual Disability: A Kantian Approach." In: *Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Disability*, ed. Adam Cureton and David Wasserman, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Lerner, Barron and Caplan, Arthur, 2015. "Euthanasia in Belgium and the Netherlands: On a Slippery Slope?" *JAMA Intern Med* 175 (10): 1640–1641.
- National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1978. *The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research*, Bethesda, MD: US Government Printing Office.
- Persad, Govind, Wertheimer, Alan, and Emanuel, Ezekiel, 2009. "Principles for Allocation of Scarce Medical Interventions." *Lancet* 373 (9661): 423–431.
- Schüklenk, Udo et al., 2011. "End-of-Life Decision-Making in Canada: The Report by the Royal Society of Canada Expert Panel on End-of-Life Decision-Making." *Bioethics* 25 (s1): 1–73.
- Schulman, Adam and President's Council on Bioethics (US), 2008. *Human Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President's Council on Bioethics*, Washington, D.C.: President's Council on Bioethics.

- Solberg, Carl Tollef and Gamlund, Espen, 2016. "The Badness of Death and Priorities in Health." *BMC Med Ethics* 17 (21): 1–9.
- Velleman, David, 1999. "A Right of Self-Termination?" *Ethics* 109 (3): 606–628.
- Woodward, Amanda and Gerson, Sarah, 2014. "Mirroring and the Development of Action Understanding." *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences* 369 (1644): 20130181.