## 11. Freedom and Practical Reason

The last chapter argued that the dignity of persons and autonomy of the will not only entail one another as the Reciprocity Thesis asserts, but also that they are presupposed by the second-person standpoint. Both are transcendental conditions for the very possibility of second-personal reasons (or "normative felicity conditions," as I have called them). So we must presuppose them when we address second-personal reasons of any kind.

Even if this argument succeeds in its own terms, however, it might seem to have only limited vindicatory force, since it appears just to widen the circle of reciprocity. What can assure us that the notion of a second-personal reason and its companion ideas of valid demand, accountability, and the authority to claim and demand are not all themselves empty? Even if taking up the second-person stance commits us to equal dignity and autonomy, that is consistent with that standpoint and its associated commitments being no more than rationally optional, or worse, illusory.

In this chapter, I respond to this challenge by placing second-personal reasons within a more comprehensive understanding of practical reason and our freedom as rational agents. Developing Fichte's insights, I argue that the second-person standpoint gives us a perspective on our own agency that enables us to appreciate a fundamental difference between theoretical and practical reason and so improves our grasp of reasons for acting. Were someone somehow to avoid taking it up, consequently, she would fail to appreciate what we, who have taken it up, can validate as reasons from a more comprehensive view that includes it.

Before I begin to lay out this line of thought, however, we should note that there is no obvious way simply to refuse to see things second-personally. The force of Strawson's original arguments in "Freedom and

277

Resentment" partly derives from the fact that reactive attitudes, along with their second-personal presuppositions, are aspects of the human condition that are not optional in any realistic psychological sense. Recognizable human life without second-personal thought and experience is simply unimaginable, as the example of Stalin helps confirm as an extreme case.[^1] In itself, however, this has only limited philosophical significance. The philosophical question is whether we should see things in this way. As Hume noted in another context, that we find ourselves naturally taking up this perspective when we leave our studies does not settle the reflective philosophical question we raise within them (1978: 455). And after all, the capacity for philosophical reflection is no less distinctively human than is the disposition to reactive attitudes.

Or again, a Fichtean summons from another free and rational agent will usually be enough to set us to thinking second-personally, if only in considering how to respond.[^2] But even if we can't avoid such acknowledgment and its accompanying presuppositions when we take up a summons, we can step back from these and ask whether, on reflection, we should still accept them. And nothing suggests that fundamental philosophical reflection on practical reason must be second-personal itself.

All the same, it is worth noting that even though the argument of the last chapter amounts to a reciprocity thesis, it is a significantly wider one than that concerning morality and autonomy of the will. So the argument of the preceding chapter may have significant vindicatory force even without the argument of this one. There have been serious philosophical critiques of the "morality system" and principle- or obligation-based conceptions of morality, not to mention rejection of moral obligations' claim to provide universal categorical reasons, but there has been little if any attempt to reject or question the whole range of second-personal concepts we have identified.[^3]

### **Normativity and the Open Question: Belief and Truth**

In this chapter, I deepen and extend the contrast between theoretical and practical reason that I began to develop in the last two chapters. I take it to be uncontroversial that the question of practical reason is what we have reason to do and that that of theoretical reason is what we have reason to believe. Using Velleman's terms, we can say that the "formal aim" of action is to do whatever there is (normative) reason to do and that the formal aim of belief is to believe whatever there is reason to believe.[^4] These formal aims are explicitly normative (as, indeed, any such formal aim would have to be). Equivalently, we could say that the formal aims of belief and action are, respectively, to believe and act as we should, as is warranted, as would be apt or correct, as is best supported by normative reasons (and so, in this sense, as is best), and so on.

In addition to its formal aim, Velleman says that belief also has a "substantive aim": to believe (only) what is true. What makes truth, or believing only truths, a substantive aim of belief is that satisfying it is conceptually distinguishable from satisfying belief 's (explicitly normative) formal aim: being what one should believe, or being warranted, apt, or correct (to believe). "What should I believe?" is a different question from "What is true?"

Trivially, we should believe whatever we should believe, whatever would satisfy belief 's formal aim, just as, trivially, we should do whatever we should do, hence whatever would satisfy action's formal aim. But with belief we can say something more substantive owing to the nature of belief. Belief is the mental state of representing the way things are with the aim of getting it right, that is, aiming to represent things as they actually are or to believe only truths. Consequently, that we should believe only what is true (or what is likeliest to be true relative to our evidence) follows from the nature of belief. True beliefs are correct, where being correct is conceptually distinct from being true. If someone makes a counterfactual supposition just to see what would follow from it, it is a bad joke to say that his supposition is mistaken or incorrect. False beliefs, like false answers, are mistaken or incorrect, however.

The notions of normative reason for belief or action, or of a belief 's or action's being correct, warranted, apt, appropriate, fitting, and so on, are all normative concepts. Moore's "open question" argument is often taken to be a useful test of whether a concept is normative or not (1993: 67).[^5] So long as we bear in mind that we cannot infer identity or distinctness of properties, and, as well, that our grasp on a concept may be imperfect in various ways, we can take the fact that certain questions seem conceptually open as an indication that distinct concepts are in play (Railton 1989: 158). For example, if a philosopher uses 'good' as a synonym for 'pleasure', we can take the fact that it seems possible to ask, without conceptual confusion, "I grant that the experience would be pleasurable, but is that any reason to bring it about, desire, or have any other particular attitude toward it?" as showing that 'good', as this philosopher is using it, does not express a normative concept. By the same token, however, we must be careful not to conclude too quickly from the fact that a question of apparently the right form is logically closed that the relevant concept is a normative one. Thus, from the fact that it is not logically open to ask without conceptual confusion, "I grant that *p* is true, but is there any reason to believe *p?*" it would be a mistake to conclude that truth is a normative concept or, even more, to conclude that a '*p* is true' means the same as '*p* is something one should believe.' What closes the question is not that these have the same meaning, but what we noted above about the concept of belief. We simply don't count a way of representing or regarding *p* as true as a belief that *p,* unless it is a species of representing or regarding with the aim of so representing *p* *only-if* *p.* For example, supposing that *p* differs from believing that *p* for this very reason.

### **Normativity and the Open Question: Action, Desire, and Outcome Value**

We get leverage on the formal question of what there is reason to believe by directly considering what is true, or what is likeliest to be true given our evidence.[^6] Consider, then, a picture of the theoretical standpoint that is analogous to that of the naïve practical standpoint that we briefly discussed in the last two chapters. Experience purports to be of an independent order of fact and involves inclinations to beliefs that putatively represent that order. As we gain more experience, we correct our representations with the aim of representing things more accurately, believing only what is true. What makes it possible for experiences to confirm or conflict with one another is their objective purport. I see what seems to be a straight stick lying on the bank of a pond and notice that, when it is placed in the pond, it looks bent. Perhaps I initially believe that it is bent. But as I gain more experience with sticks and ponds, I come to the conclusion that sticks retain their straightness in ponds; they only look bent.

On this picture, the rational formation of beliefs about an independent order of fact like the empirical world is guided by responsiveness to that order, that is, to states of the world as they actually are. There is, of course, no such thing as pure responsiveness in experience—that is the "myth of the given" (Sellars 1997). Any experience that can bear on what to believe must already be conceptualized and taken within some theoretical framework. By the same token, however, unless the formation of beliefs about independent facts involved an element of receptivity (in empirical belief, responsiveness to the world as it actually is), it would be hard to see how belief formation, at least about the world, could proceed rationally.

This is just another form of a point we encountered in Chapter 9, namely, that although there are varieties of freedom, negative and positive, which even a theoretical reasoner must presuppose, nothing analogous to Kantian autonomy of the will seems to be among them. When it comes to forming beliefs about independent facts, reasons for belief cannot be found independently of properties of the objects of belief. To the contrary, rational beliefs of this kind must be guided by the very world that provides their objects. They must be object-guided and thus object-dependent.[^7]

Now, in practical reason, the question is not what to believe but what to do. Nevertheless, there is a way of thinking of the practical standpoint, what I have been calling the naïve (first-person) practical standpoint, according to which it is formally analogous to the standpoint of theoretical reason as we have just pictured it. This, again, is the way that Moore conceives of practical reasoning in *Principia Ethica.* According to Moore in *Principia,* there is a single fundamental ethical concept, the concept of good or intrinsic value, or, as Moore also puts it, of something's being such as "ought to exist for its own sake" (1993: 34). So far as this concept goes, anything whatsoever might instantiate it: experiences, objects, relations, states of affairs, or, indeed, actions. Something has intrinsic value in this sense *if-and-only-if*, it ought to exist or, as we might alternatively formulate it, if the state of its existing ought to be.

What suits Moore's conception of intrinsic value to the naïve practical standpoint is that it provides a conception of the value of possible states of the world and hence of the value of outcomes. But this means that it also provides a way of seeing action as having, like belief, a substantive aim. Whereas belief 's substantive aim is to represent the world as it actually is, action's substantive aim, on this Moorean picture, would be to bring about intrinsically valuable outcomes—the world as it ought to be, so far as this is feasible.

Actually, in *Principia,* Moore's position is that bringing about intrinsically valuable outcomes is action's formal aim, since he there maintains that the concept of being what one should do is definable in terms of the concept of intrinsic value and empirical causal concepts concerning the outcomes of possible actions. To assert that a given act is what one should do, Moore says, "is obviously to assert that more good or less evil will exist in the world, if it be adopted than if anything else be done instead" (77).[^8] This claims an identity of meaning between "what one should do" (alternatively, "what action is best supported by normative reasons," "what is the correct, most warranted, or best act, etc."), on the one hand, and, on the other, "which action is the one, of those available to the agent, that would produce the most intrinsic value." And it characterizes action's formal aim in explicitly instrumental terms. Even if an act has intrinsic value just in virtue of the kind of act it is, Moore believes, the concept of the act's being what one should do, all things considered, is nonetheless identical with the concept of its having the most instrumental value of any act available to the agent (where that instrumental value might include its "bringing about" the intrinsically valuable state of the act's being performed).

Intrinsic value for Moore is value as an existent: "When we assert that a thing is good, what we mean is that its existence or reality is good" (1993: 171). The idea that an act is intrinsically valuable, therefore, is that its existence or reality is good.[^9] Moore takes this to imply that the concept of there being a reason to perform the act is the same idea as its being the case that, if the act is performed, the world will then contain something that is intrinsically valuable as an existent; a state of the world will be brought about that ought to be simply by virtue of what it is (or would be). It is no exaggeration therefore to say that this understanding of reasons for action identifies them with action's instrumental value its capacity to produce intrinsically valuable outcomes, including, perhaps, the outcome of the act itself being performed. The concept of an action's value as an action is thus identified with that of the act's capacity to produce things with intrinsic value as existents (including, perhaps, the act itself), outcomes that ought to be just by virtue of what they are.

Thus in *Principia,* Moore held that the formal aim of action is to produce intrinsically valuable outcomes. In this, however, Moore was clearly mistaken, as he himself gave us the conceptual tool to see: the open question argument. We can suppose it to be a fact that a given action will produce the most valuable outcomes and still sensibly, that is, coherently, ask whether one should perform that act (alternatively, whether it is the act best supported by normative reasons, the best act, and so on).[^10] Identifying the formal aim of action with its capacity to produce intrinsically valuable outcomes thus fails the open question test.[^11] Similarly, one can deny that an act with the most intrinsically valuable outcomes is what one should do without self-contradiction or conceptual confusion. So the Moore of *Principia* to the contrary notwithstanding, action's formal aim cannot be identified with the bringing about of intrinsically valuable outcomes.

But this opens up the possibility that bringing about intrinsically valuable outcomes might nonetheless be action's substantive aim. Perhaps, that is, just as accurately representing the world as it actually is is belief 's substantive aim, so analogously might action have the substantive aim of bringing about the world as it ought to be, subject to constraints of feasibility. Moreover, as I have been suggesting over the last two chapters, this will indeed seem a plausible thing to think if we consider action from the naïve (first-person) practical standpoint of an agent with desires deliberating about what to do.

Desires, like beliefs, involve representations. Just as a belief is always a belief that *p,* for some *p,* so also, on a familiar philosophical picture, at least, is a desire always a desire that *p,* for some *p.*[^12] If, for example, I want a chocolate ice cream cone, what I want is that I eat such a cone. But belief and desire differ in their directions of fit. Beliefs have the mindto-world direction of fit—they are correct when they fit the world; however, desires have the world-to-mind direction of fit—from their perspective, at least, the world is "correct," as it should be, when it fits them (Anscombe 1957; Platts 1979: 256–257; Smith 1994: 111–119).

Care is required, however, in interpreting this familiar idea. We should not take it to mean that desires dictate to the world in the sense that a desire that *p* somehow makes it the case that *p* has value or ought to obtain. That would be getting normative reasons on the cheap, deriving an ethical 'ought' from a psychological 'is'; and it would fail also to appreciate the "backgrounding" of desire from the agent's point of view (Darwall 1983; Pettit and Smith 1990). The point is rather that in desiring that *p,* an agent regards *p* as valuable, as a state of the world that ought to be.[^13] She takes it that there is normative reason to bring *p* about.

From the naïve practical standpoint, therefore, an agent will take herself to have normative reasons to bring about the objects of her desires not because her desires create or are a source of reasons but because in desiring these objects, she sees them as states she has reason to bring about. From this perspective, the agent looks, as it were, through her desires and agency to how the world might better be and to what she can do to bring this about. Her desires seem to provide a form of "practical experience" that is analogous to experience of the world as this operates in reasoning about what to believe about the world as it actually is.[^14] They present themselves as a form of epistemic access to the intrinsic value of the states that are their objects, and hence, to normative reasons for bringing these states about. They will not seem the only form of access; neither will they seem incorrigible. Being pleased that *p* also involves seeing *p* as something good or as a state that ought to be.[^15] And since pleasure differs from desire precisely in the fact that pleasure's objects are conceived to obtain in fact and desire's are conceived not as actual but only as possible, pleasure may seem to provide more credible evidence that its object is valuable and ought to be.

Thus, just as a theoretical reasoner takes his experiences as evidence of the way the world actually is and attempts by comparing and extending his experiences in various ways to come to beliefs that are likeliest to satisfy belief 's substantive aim, so likewise does a naïve practical reasoner treat her practical experiences, her desires and other like responses, as evidence of what possible states of the world would be intrinsically good, hence, of how the world should be. And in so doing, she effectively treats action as having a substantive aim—bringing about the world as it should be—that is analogous to belief 's: representing the world as it actually is.

Now if the idea of intrinsic value is itself a normative notion, it may seem puzzling that it could figure in a substantive rather than a formal aim. However, we saw above why bringing about valuable outcomes cannot be the formal aim of action. The concept of an act one ought to do is a distinct concept from that of an act that would bring about the most valuable outcomes, that is, possible states of the world that ought to be, or even from the concept of an act's being the sole constituent of a state of the world that ought to be. We need not worry about whether intrinsic value is an explicitly normative concept or, if it is, precisely what sort of normativity it has.[^16] It is enough for our purposes that, whatever normativity it might have, the proposition that an act would bring about the most valuable outcomes is neither identical with nor entails the proposition that the agent should perform the act (all things considered). Whether or not any form of consequentialism is true as a normative thesis, it is certainly not a conceptual truth.[^17]

Moore says in *Principia* that, if something has intrinsic value, it "ought to exist for its own sake." It is hard to see how to take such "ought to exist" or "ought to be" claims literally, since it would seem that only what can be normatively guided can be subject to oughts, and neither mere existence nor being are capable of that. The most natural way of interpreting such claims is to understand them as asserting that certain valuing attitudes, namely, the one we have toward possible states of affairs, are warranted, say, that something is desirable or worth bringing about. If we interpret them in this way (and assume that, as a conceptual matter, being desirable or worth bringing about makes a normative claim on action), then it will follow from the fact that an outcome is valuable that there is some reason for the agent to realize it. It is the entailment in the other direction—between there being a reason for the agent to do something and there being an intrinsically valuable outcome that the action would realize—that is not conceptually guaranteed. Hence, it cannot follow from the fact that an action would realize the most valuable outcomes that it is what the agent should do, all things considered. So far as the concept of reason for acting, or of what an agent should do, goes, there might be reasons for acting other than those provided by the value of outcomes.

But just for this reason, again, the aim of bringing about outcomes can be regarded as substantive with respect to action. Although it cannot be action's formal aim, it might nonetheless be action's substantive aim. And, again, this is the way things seem from the naïve practical standpoint. What action seems to be for is the bringing about of valuable states.

### **Free Agency and the Second-Person Standpoint**

What Fichte's arguments demonstrate, however, is that the perspective we get on our own agency in the second-person standpoint shows us that this cannot be right. When we are summoned to the second-person perspective, we deliberate under the assumptions that we are agents and that as agents we can act on reasons that are not outcome-based. In taking up a second-personal summons, I relate to another who is relating to me as an agent and perforce presuppose this common agency in my deliberations. My deliberative stance requires me to assume that we both have a kind of freedom that has no analogue in theoretical reasoning, just as Fichte says, and, consequently, that bringing about valuable outcomes could not possibly be action's substantive aim. Because believing only what is true is belief 's substantive aim, it is psychologically impossible to believe something on grounds unrelated to that, say, because it would be more desirable to believe it. If you are considering whether to believe *p* and reason that believing *p* would be desirable, you cannot then conclude your reasoning in a belief that *p* (as you could if you thought that *p* was more likely to be true than not). Considerations other than those appropriately related to truth are reasons of the wrong kind for belief. If action's substantive aim were to bring about valuable states, it would likewise be psychologically impossible to decide, intend, or do something on any other grounds. Considerations of other kinds would be reasons of the wrong kind for action. But we see from the second-person standpoint that this is not the case; someone can decide not to step on your foot just by acknowledging your authority to demand that he not do so.

Moreover, in deliberating second-personally, I assume not just that my co-deliberator and I are both free agents, but also that we therefore have a common second-personal authority that grounds second-personal reasons. And here again I confront a fundamental difference with theoretical reasoning. Second-personal practical authority has no clear analogue in theoretical reasoning about what to believe. There can be no fundamentally second-personal reasons for belief, and hence there is no theoretical standing that is fundamentally second-personal. I can, of course, believe something because you say so, but if I do, the second-personal standing I give you in my reasoning is defeasible by your epistemic authority, that is, by your relation to facts of the world as.[^18] When we take up the second-person deliberative stance, however, we recognize a kind of reason for acting, a second-personal reason, that neither derives from nor is reducible to any value of states or outcomes. And in so doing, we recognize a practical standing that is fundamentally second-personal, which neither depends upon nor can be defeated by the other's relation to any independent order of value, that is, by whatever facts there may be about how the world should be.

To see this more vividly, suppose, first, that you are considering what to believe about the economy's future direction, say, whether it will recover in the next quarter. You examine evidence of various kinds and form the belief that it will not. You then talk to me, who is convinced that the economy will bounce back. You and I engage in what Pettit and Smith (1996) call a serious "conversation of the intellectual kind." In the course of listening to my reasons, you become persuaded that what I am taking as evidence is misleading in various respects and that, even if it weren't, it would nonetheless be overridden by better reasons for thinking the economy won't recover for at least another two quarters. But I persist. "Trust me," I say, "things have to get better soon." Is it possible for you to believe that the economy will soon improve just because I have told you it will?[^19] That is, can you believe that it will get better simply for the reason that I have told you (or, at least tried to tell you) that it will? You could certainly believe this if you suspected that, despite the weakness of my stated reasons, my beliefs might be responding to other evidence that I cannot perhaps articulate. You could even believe it if you thought for some other reason that my beliefs on this matter might be likelier than yours to be true (say, because God had caused this). But without your supposing some such connection between my beliefs and facts about the world as they are anyway, it would simply be impossible for you to believe that the economy will recover presently just for the reason that I say it will (though I could of course cause you to believe it). To give me authority in reasoning about what to believe, you must take me to have some (epistemic) authority on the questions of fact my beliefs concern. My claim on your beliefs and your freedom of belief are both constrained by belief 's substantive aim: accurate representation of the world as it is anyway.

Now, as we have noted before, there is a kind of practical case, that of advice, that is structurally identical to the theoretical case. In fact, we might regard it as a special instance of theoretical reasoning, one in which the beliefs in question concern the practical question of what one should do. If you ask me for advice on where to invest your retirement funds during the next quarter, and you trust me, then any authority you accord me will similarly depend on what authority you take me to have on an independent question of fact, namely, what would be a sensible investment in the current economic circumstances.[^20] If you take me to have no epistemic authority on this question, then it will simply be impossible for you to treat my advice as reason-giving in the normal way, that is, to give you any reason to think you should do something when I say you should. An advisor's claim on your reasoning, as well as your freedom to treat it as advice, are both constrained by belief 's substantive aim: accurate representation, in this case, of (non-second-personal) reasons for acting, whose status as reasons has nothing to do with one person's authority to give them to another.

When, however, someone addresses second-personal reasons, a radically different kind of authority and freedom are in play.[^21] Suppose, to vary our familiar example, that it is you who has your foot on top of mine. If you recognize my claim to your removing your foot and my authority to make it, you give me second-person standing in your practical reasoning. You recognize that you should move your foot because I have the authority to demand this as, indeed, does anyone on my behalf. The authority you thus accord me in regulating your conduct by my claim is fundamentally different from that of an advisor. It is on the side of "law" and "command" rather than "counsel," according to Hobbes's famous distinction (1983: XIV.1). Unlike advice, it neither depends upon nor can be defeated by the addresser's epistemic relation to any facts that are themselves independent of the addresser's second-personal authority. Authority of the kind I claim in asking (or implicitly demanding) that you move your foot is fundamentally second-personal. I presume upon your and my (presupposed) equal standing as free and rational persons, and if you recognize my demand, you and I both presuppose that you can move your foot simply by recognizing and acting on the second-personal reason I address to you (or that we both understand the moral community to have been addressing to you before I even opened my mouth).[^22]

The crucial point here is that, since second-personal reasons neither reduce to nor derive from the independent value of any outcome, in assuming that you can act for this reason, you and I presuppose that you can act on a reason the recognition of which is independent of your (object-guided) valuation of outcomes, including as these might apparently be given in object-dependent desires. And because we take ourselves to be responsible for acting as these reasons direct, we must also assume that we have a source of motivation to do so that comes just from what makes us subject to these reasons in the first place. As I have argued, therefore, we presuppose the autonomy of our respective wills (as second-personally competent).

It follows that we must assume autonomy of the will from the same perspective through which we get a deliberative purchase on our own agency. In getting an agent's grasp of our own agency, we see that what seemed to be true from a naïve practical standpoint, that action has the substantive aim of bringing about valuable outcomes, is an illusion. If action had bringing about valuable outcomes as its substantive aim, then it would simply be impossible freely and self-consciously to act against this aim, just as it is to believe in the face of what one regards to be conclusive evidence to the contrary.[^23] When, however, we summon one another as agents second-personally, we jointly presuppose autonomy of the will and assume we can freely govern ourselves by second-personal reasons, any object-dependent desires to the contrary notwithstanding.

We should note that the assumed freedom this line of thought supports is no liberty of indifference; action and the will still have a formal aim. Nothing counts as an action in the distinctive sense in which philosophers are interested, that is, as an exercise of genuine agency, unless the agent has some reason for acting, something she herself regards as a normative reason to perform the act and on which she acts, thereby making it her reason. What second-personal deliberation enables us to see is just that action cannot have the substantive aim of bringing about valuable outcomes.

### **The Metaethics of Practical Reason: Recognitional versus Constructivist Theories**

Of course, we can then step back from the second-person standpoint and ask whether we should accept the presuppositions to which we are committed when we take it up. But when we do, we can no longer simply take the appearances of the naïve practical standpoint for granted. We have gained a sophistication about the nature of our agency that dispels our earlier naïvete´. By the same token, however, although we can't help but assume autonomy and equal dignity when we deliberate second-personally, nothing compels us to continue to accept these when we step back and ask the most fundamental questions of practical reason.

Still, to deliberate at all, we must assume that there are some normative reasons for acting.[^24] So to vindicate the presuppositions of the secondperson standpoint, all we need to show is that we have no less reason to accept second-personal reasons than we do to accept reasons for acting of other kinds, for example, those relating to prudence, benevolence, or whatever. The fact is that we can step back from putative reasons of any kind and coherently question whether, or doubt that, what we take to be a reason for acting is a reason in fact. People often take it for granted, for example, that considerations of self-interest or the agent's own welfare give her reasons for acting. But that this is so is a substantive normative thesis and not a conceptual truth. Someone might have full command of the concept of reason for acting but nonetheless be so depressed that he doubts (without incoherence or conceptual confusion) that the fact that something would be for his good is any reason whatsoever for him to seek it.[^25] And similar points can be made for any substantive reason for acting. It is enough, therefore, if we have no less reason to accept second-personal reasons than we do to accept putative reasons for acting of other kinds.

More ambitiously, we can seek to show that on the best philosophical explanations of there being normative reasons for acting at all, there is support also for autonomy and the second-personal reasons that are grounded in the second-person standpoint. Obviously, I cannot even begin to attempt a comprehensive theory of practical reason here.[^26] What I can do, however, is to indicate briefly how, on either of two broadly popular strategies that seem to exhaust the field, there may be good philosophical reasons that vindicate the presuppositions of the second-personal standpoint.

An intuitive way of dividing the main alternatives is to consider the relation between normative reasons for acting, on the one hand, and the rationality of deliberation or agency, on the other.[^27] Korsgaard formulates the "internalism requirement" by saying that "practical-reason claims, if they are really to present us with reasons for action, must be capable of motivating rational persons" (1986: 11; see also Darwall 1983: 80–81; Smith 1994: 61). But which is the independent variable: reasons or rationality of the person (or deliberative process, or whatever)? Is a person or deliberative process rational by virtue of the fact that she is motivated by or that the process identifies genuinely normative reasons, independently specified? Or is a consideration a normative reason by virtue of the fact that it would be taken as such and motivate a rational person or as the result of a rational deliberative procedure, independently specified?

Cullity and Gaut mark this difference with a useful distinction between *recognitional* and *constructivist* theories (1997: 4). (I take this to be roughly the same distinction as Korsgaard's between *substantive realism* and *procedural realism* [1996e: 36–37].) On a recognitional theory, there exist independent normative reason facts, and whether a person or deliberative procedure is rational depends upon whether she or it adequately registers or recognizes these. *Constructivism,* by contrast, holds, in this context, that what makes something a normative reason for acting is that it would be taken as such by, and be motivating for, a free and rational agent or as a result of rational deliberation.[^28]

This is not the place to consider the merits of these respective metaethical approaches, which, as we have defined them here, would seem to exhaust the field. What I seek to do in the rest of the chapter is to say why there are good reasons on either approach to accept the proposition that, as I have already argued in Chapter 10, we must assume from the second-person standpoint, namely, that we have a dignity as free and rational persons that grounds genuine second-personal reasons.

### **Constructivism and the Second-Person Standpoint**

Constructivism (procedural realism) about practical reason is clearly the metaethical position that is most in the spirit of the Fichtean contrast between practical and theoretical reason that I have been emphasizing. The terms in which we have so far drawn the distinction do not require a constructivist account. I have argued that the Fichtean contrast requires a doctrine of autonomy of the will, but it seems possible for dignity and autonomy to be maintained at the deepest normative level within a more recognitionally realist metaphysics. Still, it seems uncontroversial that these doctrines have a greater affinity with a constructivist approach, especially of a Kantian sort (Korsgaard 1996e; Rawls 1980).

What makes someone a constructivist in our current sense is simply that she holds that the existence of normative reasons depends upon what a rational agent, or what someone deliberating about what to do rationally, would take as reasons and be motivated by. The central claim is that it is the rationality of the agent or deliberative procedure that determines normative reasons, rather than vice versa. What is then at issue within constructivism is how to specify the requisite ideal of rational agency or rational deliberation. And there have been, of course, various proposed specifications other than Kantian versions.

But all forms of constructivism agree in rejecting the recognitional realism of the naïve practical standpoint. Even non-Kantian versions of constructivism are committed to this aspect of Kant's "Copernican revolution" in the practical sphere. Practical normative facts are not just "there" to be recognized or not. Rather their "way of being" is within the practical standpoint, as presuppositions and commitments of practical reasoning. Constructivism is by definition, then, a "sophisticated" position. (Indeed, to its critics, this is its problem. It is too sophisticated, they think, and out of touch with reality.)

Moreover, it can be argued that much as constructivism is the metaethical position that is most in the spirit of the Kantian/Fichtean ideas and arguments of the last two chapters, so also is a Kantian constructivism the version that is truest to constructivism's spirit. Unsurprisingly, the most popular versions of constructivism build a measure of self-reflection into their ideals of the rational agent or of rational deliberation.[^29] On these models, rational deliberation involves stepping back from full immersion in the agent's actual motivations and intuitive normative reason judgments. But even if we identify an agent's normative reasons, not with her actual motives, but with, say, the motives she would have if fully informed, or would want if fully informed for her actual self, or something similar, it seems we will still be treating her underlying motivational dispositions as a kind of practical "given," as having default normative status. But why should we do that? After all, we can step back from any disposition to be moved, as from any motive, and question its normative credentials. If we can't take the normative status of our actual motives for granted, why should we do so with our underlying dispositions to be moved?

Thinking along these lines leads Kantians to distinguish between the matter and form of volition and between material and formal principles of action. We can step back from any motivational bent we actually have and ask whether the object of this bent is something that there is reason for us to, or that we should, care about, try to realize, and so on. And if we reject a recognitional account of how our object-dependent desires acquire normative relevance through their relation to independent normative facts, we seem to lose any reason to grant them the default relevance that what Kant calls "material practical principles," that is, "principles that presuppose an object (matter) of the faculty of desire as the determining ground of the will" would require (1996a: 21–22). But, then, as Kant says, "nothing is left but the conformity of actions as such with universal law, which is alone to serve the will as its principle" (1996b: 402). Kantian constructivists argue therefore that what leads us to reject recognitional theories should lead us also to accept autonomy of the will.[^30]

Of course, Kantians can't simply assume autonomy. But several factors now seem to converge to recommend the doctrine. First, we inescapably presuppose it when we address or acknowledge any (putative) second-personal reason. Second, within a constructivist framework, the will's being a law to itself by virtue of its form seems to be, for the reasons mentioned in the last two paragraphs, what the philosophical impulse leading to constructivism tends to in general. And third, we can combine these two ideas and say further that the standpoint from which we gain a self-reflective deliberative awareness of the autonomous agency that seems most deeply to underlie constructivism is one from which we presuppose autonomy of the will in the Kantian sense.[^31] If, consequently, the metaethical theory we accept when we step back from the second-person standpoint is constructivist, there seem to be good reasons for thinking that the assumptions of dignity and autonomy we inescapably make within that standpoint are ones that will at least survive at the metaethical level, if not find further support.

On a Kantian constructivist picture, the doctrine of autonomy expresses itself in the idea that substantive, reason-grounding norms must be constructible through a procedure that can itself be seen to be internal to the exercise of the will. This requires companion conceptions of autonomous will and constructivist procedure that must fit one another. Our conception of what it is to be an autonomous will must itself include the capacity to engage in the relevant procedure of construction, and our conception of the relevant procedure must be such that it can be realized, in principle, in autonomous wills.[^32] This, of course, is what we find in

Kant's companion ideas of autonomy of the will and the CI, at least as these are interpreted within constructivism. The CI-procedure, as it is sometimes called, is a constructive process that involves considering what can be rationally willed from a perspective of one among other free and rational persons, where what it is to be such a person includes having the capacity to take up this perspective.[^33]

Now I have been arguing that this is precisely the perspective we do take up when we address one another second-personally and, correspondingly, that we are committed to the second-personal version of the CI when we do. (I develop this latter theme further in Chapter 12.) The second-person standpoint itself presupposes, as we saw in Chapter 10, the companion ideas of autonomy of the will and of a kind of normative reason for acting, second-personal reasons, that we must assume to be acceptable to addressees as free and equal persons. And it provides as well a conception of the role of specific substantive norms of moral obligation, namely, as mediating reciprocal respect between mutually accountable free and equal persons.[^34] As I argued at the end of Chapter 9, this can be provided by an interpretation of the CI-procedure that grounds it in dignity conceived as equal second-personal authority.

In addition, a Kantian constructivism can lead to a contractualist normative theory of these more specific norms and normative reasons. A constructive procedure can be mobilized not just at the metaethical level to vindicate the normative pretensions of the moral law (the dignity of persons) in general, but also in the foundations of normative moral theory to provide an account of what specific mandatory norms we are committed to complying with as mutually accountable free and rational persons.[^35] In the next chapter, we turn to how the second-person standpoint can help provide a rationale for contractualist accounts of moral obligation, where mandatory norms are seen to result from a hypothetical choice or contract from the perspective of free and equal persons. Whether we conceive of such a procedure, as Rawls does, in terms of a choice behind a veil of ignorance, or as Scanlon does, in terms of what no one could reasonably reject, or as Thomas Hill has proposed, as specifying an ideal of equal respect, contractualism provides a way of thinking of the justification of mandatory norms within moral reasoning for which, I argue, the second-person standpoint can provide a more fundamental rationale (Hill 1989; Rawls 1971: 17, 111; Scanlon 1998).[^36]

### **Recognitional Theories and the Second-Person Standpoint**

So far, then, we have seen some reasons to think that the equal authority of free and rational agents to which we are committed in the secondperson standpoint can survive, indeed that it can find further support, when we step back from that perspective and pursue metaethical reflection in a constructivist vein. But there is no reason to think that this phenomenon is restricted to constructivism.

According to recognitional theories, deliberation is a matter of registering considerations whose status as reasons is independent of any ideal of rational deliberation. As we ordinarily experience it, a desire for some outcome involves its seeming as if there is some reason to realize the outcome and as if one is somehow in rapport with this normative fact. Now if a recognitional theory were to credit only the ethical intuitions and judgments we are inclined to from a naïve practical standpoint, then it would require us to think that no second-personal reasons exist and that both the dignity of persons and autonomy of the will are chimerical ideas. But there is absolutely no reason for a recognitional theory to restrict itself in this way. Object-dependent desires or Moorean intuitions surely do not exhaust the range of our ethical experiences and intuitive judgments. Most importantly for our purposes, reactive attitudes also present themselves as responding to normative reasons for acting, and in this instance the reasons are second-personal.[^37] What possible reason could we have for thinking that our object-dependent desires and intuitive judgments of intrinsic value or desirability are evidentiary or veridical that we would not also have for so regarding intuitive judgments of second-personal reasons and second-personal authority? From a recognitional perspective, there seems no more reason to think that our desires give us access to the existence of normative reasons for outcomes than for thinking that reactive attitudes are evidence for second-personal reasons grounded in second-personal authority.

Moreover, whether addressing second-personal reasons invariably presupposes autonomy and dignity, as I have argued, or not, there seems no doubt whatsoever that we experience feelings that present themselves as responses to reasons grounded in dignity, that is, as instances of Kantian *reverentia.*[^38] When Omar Khatib feels remorse at having shot David Blumenfeld and expresses it, calling him, for the first time, "David," must we not interpret Omar as having a powerful feeling that there was reason for him not to have done what he did that derives from David's dignity?[^39] Similarly, when someone is subjected arbitrarily to the will of another, this can give her a sense of her own dignity through her reactive response to the other's self-conceit. Surely, we can hear something like this in Sojourner Truth's famous speech to the Women's Convention in Akron, Ohio, in 1851: "And ain't I a woman?"

When we have such feelings of recognition respect for persons, whether for ourselves or others, we seem to be presented with valid reasons for acting no less vividly than we are when we ardently desire an outcome. Absent some further explanation, there is no reason to credit the latter experiences but not the former. So here again, when we step back and reflect metaethically, this time in a recognitional realist vein, the equal dignity of persons to which we were committed in the second-person standpoint at least survives and arguably finds additional support.

To deliberate at all, you and I must presuppose that there are normative reasons for acting. But what reasons for acting are there? In this chapter, I have argued both that we have no less reason to accept second-personal reasons grounded in equal dignity than we do reasons for acting of other kinds and that these second-personal reasons can plausibly be accounted for on the major metaethical theories of reasons for acting. If we must assume the existence of normative reasons to deliberate at all, and if our best theories of normative reasons validate equal second-personal authority, then we should conclude that, for practical purposes, at least, second-reasons grounded in our common dignity really do exist.

[^1]: See the discussion of Stalin in Chapter 6. Compare Scheffler's remark about the attempt to regiment reactive attitudes along consequentialist lines: "[T]he idea that it would be wrong for the innocent woman and her associates to resent the man for harming her in order to make optimal use of his causal opportunities, but appropriate for them to resent or be indignant with him for not harming her, seems psychologically and humanly absurd" (2004: 230).
[^2]: Cf. Korsgaard: "It is impossible to hear words of a language you know as mere noise. In hearing your words as *words,* I acknowledge that you are someone" (1996e: 143).
[^3]: Thus, we should note that one of the most influential critics of the "morality system," Bernard Williams—who coined the phrase "morality system" itself in *Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy*—nonetheless defends the idea of "basic human rights" (1985: 192). For an earlier important criticism of law-based moral conceptions, see Anscombe 1958. See also Slote 1992 and Baier 1993. The classic critique of the claim that moral obligations are categorical is Foot 1972.

[^4]: Velleman 2000. I am much indebted to Velleman's work on the aim of belief in what follows.
[^5]: On this point, see Darwall, Gibbard, and Railton 1997: 3–4.
[^6]: Evidence is a relation between propositions. Evidence that *p* (is true), provides reason to believe that *p* (is true).
[^7]: This doesn't mean that they must not also be to some degree principle-dependent, but given the substantive aim of belief they can hardly be principle-dependent in the way autonomy of the will requires.
[^8]: Moore formulates this in terms of what is "absolutely right or obligatory," but it is clear enough that this is what he has in mind.
[^9]: On this point, see Moore 1993: 197. I discuss what Moore says there in Darwall 2003b.

[^10]: I hope this will strike the reader at this point as understatement. Otherwise the claim that any second-personal reasons exist would be not just false but incoherent!
[^11]: As W. D. Ross noted (1930: 8–9).
[^12]: Although I make use of this familiar picture of desire here, I think there are good reasons for being suspicious of it, some of which I discuss in Darwall 2002b: 47–49, 92– 94. First, benevolent desires have not just a propositional "direct object" but also an "indirect object": the being for whose sake the (beneficial) state of affairs is desired. Second, there are many desires for objects (e.g., to engage in a certain activity) that cannot adequately be characterized as desires for a state in which one engages in that activity.
[^13]: More carefully, we should say that in desiring that *p,* it seems, or it is to the agent as if, *p* is valuable or a state that ought to be. One can, of course, desire that *p* and judge there is no reason whatsoever to bring *p* about, just as one can have an experience that is as of a bent stick in a pond and judge that there is no reason to think that the stick is really bent. I discuss these points at greater length in Darwall 2001.

[^14]: For a defense of this conception of desire, see Stampe 1987.
[^15]: As Sidgwick's view of pleasure (1967) brings out. For a discussion of Sidgwick's ethics along the lines presented in this paragraph, see Darwall 1974.
[^16]: Neither need we concern ourselves with whether such value can be agent-neutral (as Moore himself certainly supposed) or whether it is agent-relative. What matters, for present purposes, is the relation between the value of outcomes and reasons to act.
[^17]: That no interesting claim about the good could be a conceptual truth was, of course, one of Moore's main points in *Principia.* That is why it is so ironic (or so revelatory of the depth of his error) that he could have failed to see that the same thing must be true about the right (or the rational) to do.
[^18]: I emphasize that the second-personal theoretical authority is defeasible by epistemic authority. I take what I am saying to be consistent with various kinds of default second-personal theoretical authority that might be ordinarily presupposed in interpersonal theoretical reasoning (Burge 1993; Coady 1992; Foley 1994; Hinchman 2000; Moran 2005; Pettit and Smith 1996).

[^19]: As opposed, say, to being simply *caused* in some nonrational way to believe it by my saying so without taking either anything I say or my saying it as a reason to believe that the economy will improve.
[^20]: I use 'fact' here in a sense that is not metaethically loaded, in which even noncognitivists can accept that there are facts about what one should do.
[^21]: On this point, see, again, Wolff 1970: 7.
[^22]: Again, moral obligations involve implicit demands that are "in force," as I noted in Chapter 1, even when actual individuals have not explicitly made them. As Strawson points out, "the making of the demand *is* the [moral community's] proneness to [reactive] attitudes" (1968: 92–93). This, again, is like Hart's interpretation of Bentham's account of law (1990: 93–94) involving "quasi-commands." See the discussion of this point in note 17 of Chapter 1.
[^23]: Note: "freely and self-consciously." Although we seem to be able to believe contrary to what we *believe* is better evidence, it is by no means clear that we can believe contrary to what we are then *seeing* as better evidence. And something comparable would be true of action if it had the substantive aim of bringing about intrinsically valuable outcomes.
[^24]: For a particularly good discussion of the metaethical consequences of this familiar point, see Enoch forthcoming.
[^25]: I argue for this at greater length in chapter 1 of Darwall 2002b.
[^26]: I have, however, tried to take steps toward doing so in various places over the years: Darwall 1983, 1985, 1986b, 1990, 1992, and 1997.
[^27]: On this point, see Darwall 1986b.
[^28]: This is also a kind of *existence internalism,* since it holds that being motivating (for a rational agent) is essential to being a normative reason for acting. For the distinction between *existence internalism* and *judgment internalism,* see Darwall 1983: 54–55. I discuss different varieties of internalism more comprehensively in Darwall 1997.

[^29]: For example, full information theories; reflective endorsement tests; self-reflective, fully informed tests; and so on. See, for example, Brandt 1979; Korsgaard 1996e; Railton 1986; and Smith 1994.
[^30]: The lesson that Kantian constructivists draw from this is, in effect, that agency could not, by its very nature, have a substantive aim. The lesson seems to be that the aim of action is autonomy, understood, not in nonnormative terms, but as following formal norms we are committed to as free and rational wills. For a defense of the idea that the substantive aim of action is autonomy, understood, roughly as self-direction driven by a desire for self-understanding, see Velleman 2000.
[^31]: That there is a deep connection between autonomy, conceived as the capacity to step back from and critically evaluate actual motives, and the open question argument is a theme that is discussed in Rosati 1995 and 2003 and in Darwall 1990 and 1992.
[^32]: Cf. Rawls's discussion of "rational autonomy" (of the parties to the original position as agents of construction) and "full autonomy" (of citizens as persons who can both take up the constructive position of the parties and regulate themselves by the principles they would rationally choose or construct) (1980: 520–521).

[^33]: As in Rawls's interpretation of Kant and those who follow him. See Rawls 2000.
[^34]: I discuss this in Chapter 12. It can sometimes seem to be missing from some of Kant's formulations of the Categorical Imperative, such as the Formula of Universal Law: "Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it become a universal law [or universal law of nature]" (1996b: 421). However, once we appreciate how holding someone responsible or accountable just is, essentially, relating to her as a person, we can see how the Formula of Humanity, which requires us to treat humanity or rational nature always as an end in itself, and the Formulas of Autonomy and of the Realm of Ends, should be interpreted in such a way that moral legislation involves legislating principles as norms with which we are accountable for complying.

[^35]: That these two levels should be distinguished is illustrated by the example of Scanlon (1998), a normative contractualist who does not advance constructivism as a metaethical position.
[^36]: Here I have in mind Rawls's idea of "rightness as fairness," rather than the more specifically political philosophical uses to which Rawls put the contractualist idea after *A Theory of Justice* (1971: 17, 111).
[^37]: On this point, see Chapter 4.
[^38]: See Chapter 6.
[^39]: Recall here Adam Smith's remark, discussed in Chapter 4, that what resentment is "chiefly intent upon, is not so much to make our enemy feel pain in his turn, as . . . to make him sensible that the person whom he injured did not deserve to be treated in that manner" (1982a: 95–96).
