## 12. A Foundation for Contractualism

In the early and middle chapters of this book, I attempted to draw out some of the ways in which the second-person standpoint and second-personal reasons are implicated in our understanding of moral obligation and the equal dignity of persons. In more recent chapters, I have argued that the demands we have standing to make of one another as persons generate valid normative reasons for acting.[^1] But what, more specifically, do these reasons require? What do "we owe to each other" (Scanlon 1998) as equal moral persons?

This final chapter is obviously not the place to try to answer that question. I invoke Scanlon's famous phrase in part to suggest, however, that although they do not require it, the arguments I have been advancing in this book lead naturally to a contractualist approach to attempting to do so. The fundamental idea of the dignity of persons, to which I have claimed we are committed from the second-person standpoint, is mutual accountability as equals. And this commits us to regulating our conduct by principles that are acceptable, or not reasonably rejectable, to each as free and rational agents. When we attempt to hold anyone accountable by addressing second-personal reasons of any kind, we presuppose that the authority and principles we implicitly invoke are ones our addressee can be expected to accept, or not reasonably to reject, as a free and rational agent who is apt for second-personal address.

In this final chapter, I briefly develop the idea that the second-person standpoint can ground a contractualist normative moral theory. It is a hallmark of contractualist theories that they hold principles of right to have a distinctive *role,* namely, as mediating relations of mutual respect. According to the "contractualist ideal," Scanlon says, we realize "mutual recognition" or reciprocal respect as equals when we conform to principles of right, understood as contractualism understands them (1998: 162). This is so for two different but related reasons. First, the *content* of contractualist principles specifies our obligations to one another as equals. Complying with these principles can thus show respect for each other as persons who may not be treated in some ways and who must be treated in others.[^2] Second, but no less importantly, contractualism also maintains that the *form* of principles of right is mutual accountability to one another as equal persons. When, consequently, Scanlon says that an act is wrong "if it would be disallowed by any principle that no one could reasonably reject," we should understand this to mean: an act is wrong if the act would be disallowed by a principle no one could reasonably reject our holding one another accountable for complying with. It is the right's connection to accountability, indeed, that makes a "no-reasonablerejection" test appropriate in the first place. It is because a moral obligation presents a demand that it is staked on its addressee's not being able reasonably to reject the principle that underlies it (again: to reject it as a basis for demands through mutual accountability). An art critic need not withdraw a critical judgment just because the artist she is criticizing might reasonably reject its grounds. But this is not so when we make demands in holding one another accountable. As we saw in Chapter 5 (and again in our discussion of Kant's "fact of reason" in Chapter 10), in addressing moral demands, we imply that there are conclusive second-personal reasons that our addressee is (second-personally) competent to accept and freely determine himself by. And that commits us to denying the possibility of reasonably rejecting a principle that it would be wrong to violate.

So this is the second place where mutual recognition or respect enters the contractualist picture: the form and role that principles of right have in contractualism. In holding ourselves mutually accountable for conforming to contractualist principles of right, we recognize one another's equal standing to demand respect.

We may well think, however, that moral obligations have a wider scope, that their content extends beyond duties we owe (in the first instance) simply to persons. Many of us believe that we have moral obligations to nonrational humans and other animals and, indeed, to the natural environment that can neither be derived from nor be reduced to any "we owe to each other."[^3] If, however, we take moral responsibility to be part of what moral obligation involves in such cases, then we must hold that we are accountable to one another (as members of the moral community) in these cases as well (that is, by virtue of principles' form). I am inclined strongly to think that the content of moral obligations does have this wider scope. But I know of no promising way of vindicating these thoughts that does not build upon or extend from accountability in the central second-personal case.[^4]

Contractualism, then, is concerned by its very nature with second-personal relations of mutual accountability and respect. Principles of right express normative relations between persons, and violations must be understood against this background. If I wrong someone, then, as Scanlon points out, "my relation with them is already altered by that fact, whatever they do."

They may retaliate in some way, or they may forgive me. But forgiveness is merely a willingness to forgo reacting to a wrong in ways one would be justified in doing, such as by being angry or severing friendly relations. It does not alter the wrong that has been done. (272)

The fundamental contractualist moral relation is thus mutual respect. Wrongs violate that relation; they fail adequately to recognize the dignity of persons and so call it into question. They therefore warrant a reciprocally recognizing response that seeks to reestablish mutual respect, demanding it of the violator in a way that simultaneously bestows it on him.[^5]

### **Versions of Contractualism**

Common to all contractualist theories is the idea that the content of the moral obligations we owe to one another as equal moral persons is to be explained as the result of a (hypothetical) agreement, choice, or "contract" from some perspective that situates individuals equally as moral persons (and so expresses respect for persons as such). This general idea can be developed in different ways. Justice as fairness, as Rawls presents it in *ATheory of Justice,* is a contractualist theory of justice. And Rawls there suggests a theory of moral right, "rightness as fairness," which can be developed along similar lines. Principles of right apply to individual conduct rather than to the basic structure of society, but otherwise rightness as fairness attempts to explicate such principles in a manner similar to the more familiar "derivation" of principles of justice. There are the same elements: the "original position" with its "veil of ignorance," a mutually disinterested choice of principles from that perspective as instrumentally rational in advancing the parties' interests ("primary goods") as free and equal persons, and so on (Rawls 1971: 17, 111).[^6] But whereas the parties in the original position choose principles of justice to inform the public criticism of their basic social structure, we should understand principles in "rightness as fairness" as informing the kind of criticism that is distinctive of moral obligation—mutual accountability.[^7] The parties in the original position choose principles with which people are to be held accountable for complying.

Scanlon's version differs from "rightness as fairness" in three important ways. It employs no informational constraint like the veil of ignorance. Its derivation depends on an avowedly moral idea of "reasonable" rather than (a suitably constrained) "rational" acceptance or rejection (where standards of rationality are independent of moral criteria). And its procedural standard or benchmark is that no one be able reasonably to reject a candidate principle, as opposed to the principle's being one that any person could or would rationally or reasonably choose or accept.

We need not here consider the relative merits of these or other forms of contractualism.[^8] My aim in this last chapter is to argue that what is common to contractualist approaches, that we are mutually accountable for regulating ourselves by principles that are acceptable (in some suitable sense) to each as equal moral persons, can itself be grounded in, and is best appreciated from, the second-person standpoint. Or, to put the point the other way round: the most promising way to work out the content of moral principles we are committed to by the equal dignity we must presuppose in the second-person perspective is through some version of contractualism.

### **Contractualism and the Categorical Imperative**

Since Kant is the philosopher whose ideas stand most clearly behind contractualism, it may help to begin by sketching briefly the relations in Kant's ethics between the dignity of persons, as it operates within the Formula of Humanity (FH) ("So act that you use humanity, whether in our own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means" [Kant 1996b: 429]) and other formulations of the CI. Persons by their nature, have a dignity that makes treating them (or humanity or rationality in them) as a mere means a violation. They are, as Kamm (1989, 1992) and Nagel (1995) have put it, "inviolable": beings who may not be treated as a mere means. But what is it to treat someone, or to treat humanity or rationality in that person, merely as a means?

It is widely acknowledged that there are ways of wronging others forms of deception, manipulation, and coercion, for example—that treat a person's rationality merely instrumentally (Korsgaard 1996b; Wood 1999: 124–132). But when is utilizing someone's rationality or humanity using it merely as a means? Recall the contrast, which played a central role in the argument of Chapter 10, between coercing by threats and holding someone accountable through notice of a warranted sanction There is a sense in which threats are addressed to a person's rationality, or to a person as rational. After all, threats do their work through the threatened person's practical reasoning. But this just means that their target is the person's reason. A threat does not, however, address a person in the sense with which we have been concerned in this book; indeed, a threat need not address a person in any obvious sense. It could suffice for the threatened person simply to learn about a likely consequence of some act in a way that involves no communication at all, say, by seeing a gun trained on him in a mirror. When, however, someone addresses a second-personal demand, he purports to address (and, I have argued, to respect) the other as a free and rational agent.

Any valid second-personal reason must be addressable to free and rational persons as such not just in the way a threat is "addressed" to a person's rationality but to someone as having a normative standing as rational. It is a presupposition of this address that the (second-personal) reason and the authority relations in which it is grounded must be acceptable to the other as a free and rational person. If, consequently, it makes a demand on the other as an equal person, then it must be the case that the other would rationally endorse or not reasonably reject it as a demand with which persons are to be held accountable for complying. Second-personal reasoning is essentially justification to one another, just as Scanlon understands reasoning about our moral obligations.

Suppose, again, that a sergeant in a citizen militia of a free and democratic republic issues an order to a private to do ten pushups and that she informs the private that he will be confined to quarters if he fails to comply.[^9] Such an address differs from a mere threat in a fundamental way.[^10] If the sergeant had lacked her authority and simply threatened the same evil, then that would have been coercion pure and simple, using the person or his rationality as a mere means. Moreover, as we saw in Chapter 10, in holding the private accountable for complying, the sergeant must herself presuppose this distinction. And as we also saw, she can intelligibly assume this *only-if* she can presuppose as well that the private can be expected to accept her authority, and the principles that give her orders normative force, as a free and rational agent. This is what ties accountability to a rational-acceptance, or to a no-reasonablerejection, test. In attempting to hold another accountable, second-personally, one purports to address him as free and rational. And to make a demand of someone as free and rational, one must presuppose that the person can freely determine himself by that same demand, that the demand is one he can accept, or not reasonably reject, as free and rational, and therefore make of himself. Respecting the dignity of persons is thus tied to holding oneself accountable for complying with demandauthorizing-principles that free and rational persons would accept, or could not reasonably reject, as such.

In my view, this is what links FH to the formulations of the CI more usually associated with contractualism: the Formula of the Realm of Ends (FRE) and, when properly understood, the Formulation of Universal Law (FUL). The idea of a realm or "kingdom of ends," Kant says, is that of "a systematic union of rational beings through common laws."

For all rational beings stand under the *law* that each of them is to treat himself and all others *never merely as a means* but always *at the same time as ends in themselves.* But from this there arises a systematic union of rational beings through common objective laws. (1996b: 433)

And this implies FRE: "Every rational being must act as if he were by his maxims at all times a lawgiving member of the universal kingdom of ends" (Kant 1996c: 438).

Contractualism is an interpretation of this fundamental Kantian doctrine. When we add in the Kantian claim by which we were guided in Chapter 10, namely, that dignity is a second-personal authority "by which" a person "exacts respect for himself from all other rational beings," we get that a "realm of ends" is a community of equal, free, and rational agents who hold themselves mutually accountable for complying with demands they can accept or not reasonably reject and so make of one another as free and rational (1996d: 434–435). Persons can make some specific demand of each other, therefore, *only-if* they can expect that each would sensibly accept the demand, or that no one could reasonably reject it, as free and rational. And this means that they can make the demand *only-if* they can expect that each would accept, or could not reasonably reject, as free and rational, that people be held accountable for complying with the principle that specifies the demand.

As we noted first in Chapters 4 and 5, the idea of moral accountability inevitably brings in the companion idea of moral community, which is implicit also in the ideas of moral obligation and the dignity of persons. We make moral demands, and hold ourselves and one another accountable, from the perspective of equal members of the moral community. In making ourselves mutually accountable we function as equal lawexecuting or law-enforcing members of the moral community. But FRE brings in the idea of moral community in another fundamental way: each person is to conduct herself as though she were a "lawgiving member" of the realm of ends. We have an equal standing not just in executing or enforcing the moral law (whatever its content), but also in "determining" its content. As with contractualism, I believe the most promising way of interpreting Kant's idea is not in terms of any actual determination of the moral law by actual persons but, rather, in terms of the law's being determined by some hypothetical, idealized process of agreement that situates the parties as equal persons. Persons function as equal law-giving and law-executing members of the moral community, the realm of ends, then, when they hold themselves and one another responsible for complying with mandatory principles that would rationally be accepted by all free and rational persons as such, or reasonably rejected by none, that is, from a hypothetical perspective that situates the parties equally in these respects (for example, behind a veil of ignorance regarding individuating differences). For this reason, Kant calls the principles that specify demands we can make on each person as free and rational "common laws." They satisfy Rousseau's famous formula of mediating a form of association "by means of which each, uniting with all, nevertheless obeys only himself" (1997: 49–50).

Now FRE differs substantially from the letter of FUL: "Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same will that it become a universal law [or universal law of nature]" (Kant 1996b: 421). Read narrowly, FUL says that it is morally unacceptable to act on some maxim or principle if one could not oneself will (choose, accept) that it become universal law. So interpreted, it says nothing about what others must be able to accept or be unable to reject. By contrast, what Parfit (2004) calls "Kant's Contractualist Formula" requires that "we ought to act on the principles that *everyone* could rationally choose," which clearly seems more in the spirit of FRE.

Now I argued in Chapters 9 and 10 that we should take the most fundamental idea in the Kantian framework to be the dignity of persons, conceived as an equal basic second-personal authority. As I see it, contractualist formulae are a way of developing or further specifying this idea.[^11] We can think along the same lines in Kant's framework if we take FH as fundamental, interpret FH in terms of FRE, and then interpret FUL in its light. This gives us a way of unifying all formulations of the CI, as Kant clearly and explicitly intends (1996b: 436). The underlying idea is that we treat rational nature, whether in ourselves or in others, as an end in itself by holding ourselves and each other responsible for complying with principles that we and they could will (or not reasonably reject) as universal law. The relevant willing must be of a certain kind and from a certain perspective, however. If, for example, the reason I (or anyone) could not will that some principle universally govern conduct is because of some idiosyncratic interest that is neither rooted in nor supported by any interest I have as a free and equal rational person, then it is hard to see how Kant could hold it to be morally relevant. Alternatively, if the interest meets this test but I object to a principle's being universally governing because of the way it affects my interests as an equal member, though I wouldn't if it were someone else, then this is also an objection of the wrong kind to a candidate moral principle.[^12] Similarly, the Formula of Autonomy (FA) holds that we are to constrain our conduct by "the idea of the will of every rational being as a *will giving universal law*"

(1996b: 432, see also 434, 438, 440). Here again, it seems clear that we should take FA to be governed by FRE. In general, then, FRE, which is the most clearly contractualist version of the CI, also seems to be its most fundamental "procedural" version. And this procedural idea, in turn, is grounded in the most fundamental idea to which we are committed from the second-person standpoint: FH and the equal dignity of free and rational persons.

### **The Basis for Rational Acceptance or Reasonable Rejection in Contractualism**

An ideal of moral community as mutually accountable free and rational persons can also provide a basis from which to argue within contractualist procedures, namely, through interests individuals have as such members. This is perhaps clearest in Thomas E. Hill Jr.'s version of "Kantian Constructivism" (1989), which includes a less restrictive veil of ignorance than Rawls's and considers what principles ideal legislators could accept when they attempt to specify more precisely the equal dignity of persons. And even though Rawls's standard of "rational" choice in the original position is instrumentalist and morally neutral, it is harnessed to a conception of the "fundamental aims" of the parties that privileges "highest-order interests" they have as mutually accountable free and rational persons in exercising their "two moral powers," namely, their capacity for a sense of justice (or, in "rightness as fairness," to hold themselves and one another morally accountable) and their capacity to "form, revise, and rationally to pursue a conception of the good" (Rawls 1980: 525).

Scanlon is less concerned to provide a unified account of the grounds for reasonable acceptance or rejection, but he does say that the "range of reasons which are taken to be relevant" comes from the parties' aim of "finding principles that others who share this aim could not reasonably reject" (1998: 192; see also Kumar 2003). The shared aim, fully spelled out, is to find principles that, now to use my vocabulary, free and rational persons concerned to live mutually accountably on terms of equal respect could not reasonably reject. It is hard to see what could be relevant to this other than interests that free and rational persons can be presumed to have in living self-directed lives on terms of mutual respect with others, that is, something like the highest-order interests in exercising their "moral powers" to which Rawls refers.[^13] In whichever of these ways the contractualist approach is specifically developed, therefore, the idea of mutually accountable free and rational persons (to which we are committed from the second-person standpoint) can be appealed to within it to help assess whether candidate principles of moral obligation can be rationally accepted or reasonably rejected. A natural example is the interest in freedom from arbitrary direction by others to which we appealed in the argument of Chapter 10. This is evident in Fichte's principle of right ("I must in all cases recognize the free being outside me as a free being, i.e., I must limit my freedom through the concept of the possibility of his freedom" [2000: 49]) and in Kant's "universal principle of right" ("Any action is *right* if it can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the freedom of choice of each can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law" [1996c: 230].

### **Contractualism and Rule-Consequentialism**

We can help consolidate these points by considering Parfit's recent claim (2004) that "Kantian Contractualism" (KC) implies rule-consequentialism, the view that we should comply with whatever principles the general acceptance of which would have the best consequences. KC holds, again, that "we ought to act on the principles that everyone could rationally choose." KC rules out act-consequentialism for familiar consequentialist reasons. The consequences that matter from the standpoint of contractualist choice are those of a principle's universal acceptance—both in practical reasoning and through mutual accountability. And consequentialists widely accept that things most likely go better overall when everyone accepts and regulates themselves interpersonally by principles other than act-consequentialism.[^14] That, after all, is what lies behind Mill's rule-utilitarian theory of justice.

Actually Parfit does not claim that rationality requires a choice of principles whose acceptance would make things go best overall (that is, effectively, a choice of rule-consequentialism). What he argues, very roughly, is that rationality always permits choosing whatever leads to the best outcomes, impartially considered, and that in this instance rationality permits everyone to choose principles whose acceptance would be optimific, that is, principles with which compliance is mandated by ruleconsequentialism.

We need not worry about the details of Parfit's argument, since what we have already enables us to formulate a contractualist response. The argument's major problem is that it ignores the form that principles of right have on a contractualist theory, namely, their role in mediating mutual respect through mutual accountability. The contractualist can acknowledge the existence of impartial outcome-given reasons in general, and she can also agree *arguendo*, without threatening anything she is committed to, that it can be rational for an individual to sacrifice selfinterest in order to further impartially better outcomes. But, consistently with this, she can nonetheless deny that such a ranking of outcomes itself provides a reason of the right sort for principles of moral obligation or right. Principles of right are not simply standards for individual choice; they lay out what we have standing to demand from one another by holding each other accountable. To be a reason of the right kind to warrant a principle of right, therefore, a consideration must relate to interests we are entitled to presuppose from within a second-person standpoint, as members of a community of independent, mutually accountable, free, and rational persons.

This, of course, is Strawson's Point transposed to the issue between rule-consequentialism and contractualism. The desirability of outcomes, taken by itself, is a reason of the wrong kind to ground claims of moral responsibility, and, consequently, claims of moral obligation. The basis of choice that Parfit mentions is not this crude, however. It does not propose to substitute direct consequentialist reasoning for the principles we employ in practices of accountability. Rather, like Mill in chapter 5 of *Utilitarianism,* it proposes to treat the desirability of outcomes as a test of principles' suitability for employment in these practices.[^15] But, as we have noted before, this seems simply to postpone the problem: how can the authority of someone to demand something derive simply from the desirability of his being able to do so? This seems, again, to be a reason of the wrong kind for second-personal accountability not just in individual cases, but also for establishing the relevant practices themselves. The most that it can ground is a desire to be able to demand something, not any demand, or practice of accountability, itself. The problem with ruleconsequentialism, then, is that it attempts to derive principles of right from reasons of the wrong kind.

That said, contractualism might be represented as a kind of ruleconsequentialism in a purely formal sense. Suppose we consider a Rawlsian version of contractualism with a choice of principles from behind a veil of ignorance. And suppose we accept the argument of Harsanyi (1978) and many of Rawls's critics that it is rational for the parties to assume that it is equally probable that they could be anyone (once the veil is lifted).[^16] Now it would be a mistake to conclude from this that the parties should choose principles that would maximize their "actual," "extra-veil" utilities, as defined by whatever preferences they will come to have, for reasons we have just discussed. Rawls's idea is rather that we impute to the parties certain preferences and interests, their "highestorder interests" in living self-directed lives on terms of mutual accountability and respect, and that the parties are to be understood as making a rational choice of principles from the standpoint of furthering these imputed preferences, subject to the constraints of a veil of ignorance.

But if we allow the parties the assumption that it is equally likely they could be anyone, then why wouldn't it be rational for them to choose principles the acceptance of which would maximize the average satisfaction of these imputed preferences, that is, principles that would maximize average utility when the relevant utility measure is defined not on actual preferences but on the imputed preferences that parties have as members of the realm of ends (as mutually accountable free and rational persons)? Such a choice would seem to maximize the expected utility of the parties and thus be the instrumentally rational choice from their standpoint.[^17] I see no deep reason for a contractualist to resist this proposal. Just as once we have the distinction between object-dependent and principledependent desires, we can accommodate autonomous, mutually accountable conduct within belief/desire psychology without conceding anything a Kantian moral psychologist need care about, so also it seems that a Kantian contractualist might concede that her view is a version of ruleconsequentialism in this purely formal sense without compromising anything of fundamental theoretical importance.[^18] Since the relevant interests themselves cannot be defined independently of the idea of second-personal accountability, and so long as the contractualist framework rests ultimately on equal second-personal authority, any consequentialism of this purely formal sort does not risk getting authority simply from desirability of outcomes, that is, being based on reasons of the wrong kind.[^19]

What matters most for the contractualist is what we are committed to from the second-person standpoint, namely the equal dignity and mutual accountability of free and rational persons. This both provides the foundation for a contractualist account of principles of right in general and shapes the specific interpretations of rational choice or reasonable rejection that are employed within different contractualist accounts.

### **The Role of Publicity and Principles**

The right's connection to mutual accountability also explains why it essentially involves publicly articulable principles in a way that other ethical standards, such as ideals of virtue, need not.[^20] Standards of right and wrong are, in their nature, bases for public expectations, for what we justifiably expect of one another. So they must be able to be publicly articulated and accessible.[^21] It would be unreasonable to hold people accountable to standards whose application required some special sensibility ordinary moral agents could not be assumed to have or that could not be formulated in ways that ordinary agents can understand. In this way, standards of moral right are a moral "law," modeled on law as we generally understand it.

It is notable that this idea also plays an important role even in the utilitarian tradition, although it is often in conflict with other strains. It is, again, a strength of contractualism that its rule- or principle-regarding character complements its deepest (non-outcome-based) justification of principles. Mill's thesis that right and wrong essentially involves moral responsibility has been a recurrent theme in this book. Much less wellappreciated or even known is that a major argument of Bentham's for the principle of utility also derives from the role he thinks moral principles of right play in public directive criticism.[^22] Bentham (1962) argues that to play that role, any principle must be able to be publicly advanced on some "extrinsic ground" or "external standard," by which he means some reason that supports the principle that one can be expected to accept without already accepting the principle (or sharing the sensibility that it codifies). The argument occurs in the midst of his critique of what he regards as the many ethical philosophies that reject this constraint, whether they champion moral sense, rational intuition, common sense, or whatever.

The various systems that have been formed concerning the standard of right and wrong all of them [consist] in so many contrivances for avoiding the obligation of appealing to any external standard. (Bentham 1962: 8)

Any such theory, Bentham argues, is guilty of simply "prevailing upon the reader to accept of the author's sentiment or opinion as a reason for itself" (1962: 9). Bentham's concern is not with some merely intellectual fault, like begging the question.

The mischief common to all these ways of thinking and arguing (which, in truth, as we have seen, are but one and the same method, couched in different forms of words) is their serving as a cloke, and pretence, and aliment, to despotism; if not a despotism in practice, a despotism however in disposition: which is but too apt, when pretence and power offer, to show itself in practice. (1962: 9n)[^23]

Bentham's worry is rather that putting forward a principle of right without an external standard amounts to coercion. It is to make demands of others that they cannot reasonably be expected to accept. And Bentham's case for the principle of utility is that it can be applied uncontroversially, since it turns on empirically ascertainable facts, and that it can be expected to motivate since it concerns the "two sovereign masters" of human motivation, pleasure and pain.[^24]

This line may be somewhat unexpected in Bentham since it grounds the principle of utility in constraints on public directive ("demanding") discourse and practice on distinctly liberal grounds, rather than vice versa. But Bentham makes it clear that he intends precisely this (in this strain of argument, at least). Whether a "moral sentiment" might "be originally conceived" or "upon examination and reflection . . . be actually persisted in and justified on another ground" than "a view of utility" is, he says, something about which he neither knows nor cares. "It matters not, comparatively speaking, how they are decided." But whether in "point of right [a principle of right] can properly be justified on any other ground, by a person addressing himself to a community," is a "question of practice," the answer to which "is of as much importance as that of any can be" (1962: 9n).

### **Vindicating the Reasonable**

As Rawls and Scanlon employ it, 'reasonable' expresses a different concept than does 'rational' or 'normative reason'; it refers to the putative normative reasons that are distinctively associated with the claims we have the (second-personal) standing to make on one another as equal free and rational persons. Recall the Rawlsian dictum: persons are "self-originating sources of valid claims" (Rawls 1980: 546). (It follows, I believe, that 'reasonable' expresses a second-personal concept.) So in arguing that presuppositions of the second-person standpoint vindicate the equal dignity of persons, I have also been arguing that these vindicate the normativity of the reasonable.

Now, as I mentioned briefly in Chapter 1, Scanlon understands the problem of vindicating morality's authority to be that of explaining "the *priority* of right and wrong over other values," or of explaining their special "importance" (Scanlon 1998: 146, 147). In his original paper, Scanlon (1982) took the view that the "motivational basis" of contractualist morality is a desire to act in a way that can be justified to others. In *What We Owe to Each Other,* however, Scanlon takes a different approach, largely because of his skepticism there that desire can ground reasons for acting of any kind.[^25] Far from its being the case that reasons for acting are grounded in desires, he there argues, it is closer to the truth to say that desires typically respond to apparent reasons. In "the directedattention sense," a desire involves having one's attention "directed insistently toward considerations that present themselves as counting in favor of" what one desires (and, hence, of a desire for it) (Scanlon 1998: 39–41).

Scanlon's more recent argument for the priority of right has complexities we cannot fully pursue here.[^26] Its basis, however, is what Scanlon calls the "value" and "appeal" of standing to others in the relation of mutual recognition, both in itself and as an ineliminable aspect of valuable relations like friendship (1998: 158–168). It is because this value gives us (better, in "buck-passing" fashion, consists in) "reason[s] we have to live with others on terms that they could not reasonably reject insofar as they also are motivated by this ideal" that "we have reason to attend to the question of which actions are right and wrong" (154).[^27] Scanlon likens this to Mill's position in *Utilitarianism* that although the criterion or standard of right is provided by the greatest happiness of all, the moral

"sanction" (Mill's term for what makes considerations of right reasongiving for us) is "the desire to be in social unity with our fellow creatures" (Mill 1998: ch. 3; Scanlon 1998: 154). Roughly, for Mill, it is because of the desirability of living in unity with others that considerations of right (which are themselves based indirectly on the general happiness) give us reasons to act. Similarly, for Scanlon, it is because of the value or appeal that we take living with others on terms of mutual recognition and respect to have that considerations of right (and, relatedly, of what is reasonable) are reason-giving and, indeed, have priority for us.

There is, however, a problem with Mill's position that will infect any contractualist position that is modeled too closely upon it. Considerations of desirability, as we have seen throughout this book, are simply reasons of the wrong kind to ground (second-personal) reasons of moral obligation and right. If, consequently, the reasons we have to stand in relations of mutual recognition with others are only that it is desirable that we do so (either impartially or from our own point of view), then, no matter how weighty these reasons may be, they cannot ground the distinctive (second-personal) reasons of moral right. The most they can ground, again, is the desire to be such as to recognize the validity of moral claims; they can give us no reason to accept or recognize moral claims in their own terms.

There are actually two problems here, each connected respectively, to different aspects of moral obligation that, I have argued, are interrelated: moral obligation's (purported) supremacy or superiority, on the one hand, and its tie to mutual accountability, on the other.[^28] The first problem is that it is hard to see how, from the fact it would be desirable for us to treat considerations of right as having priority over other values (including the desirable), it can possibly follow that such considerations actually have this priority. The second problem, yet another reflection of Strawson's Point, is that it is hard to see how its being desirable that we relate to one another on terms of mutual accountability can possibly ground the distinctively second-personal claim that we are mutually accountable.

For the value of relating to one another on terms of mutual respect to be connected in the right way to the reasons we appeal to within such relations, we must see this respect as itself called for by the equal dignity of free and rational persons. It is this, I have argued, that most deeply underlies the rationale for a contractualist procedure and that we are committed to from the second-person standpoint. The reason we have for relating to others with respect is not just that this is desirable in some way or other, whether for us individually, or impartially, or whatever, but, the dignity of persons pure and simple, their having equal second-personal standing, which we are committed to accepting when we address them second-personally at all.[^29] In presupposing this, I have argued, we must presuppose that we have the standing to lay claims on one another as free and rational, where this means both that we cannot treat one another as mere means and that we are accountable to one another for not doing so.

It is the reciprocal recognition that is always already implicit in second-personal address that gets us into the space of the reasonable and justification to one another. Consider two naïve agents, *A* and *B,* reasoning first-personally on the basis of their respective evaluations of the desirability of outcomes as these are given in their desires and other practical experience. Suppose, for example, that *A* and *B* both desire the same apple and both see their desire for the apple as evidence that it would really be good for them to have it, respectively. At this point, neither *A* nor *B* will see the other's desire, will, or agency as a source of reasons for him, but neither will each see his own will and agency in this way either. From this naïve perspective, their agency and will are deliberatively "backgrounded" (Pettit and Smith 1990). What is foregrounded for both is the desirability of the objects of their respective desires, as it seems to them under their desires' influence. For *A:* my (*A*'s) having the apple would be good (desirable). For *B:* my (*B*'s) having the apple would be good (desirable).

Suppose that at this point, *A* attempts to give *B* a reason to let him, *A,* have the apple by expressing his desire, saying that his (*A*'s) having the apple would be a valuable outcome, a state that should be brought about (noting that, so far as he can tell, *B*'s having it is not). This will probably not succeed, since from *B*'s perspective, there may be, so far as she can see, nothing to be said for *A*'s having the apple and everything to be said for her (*B*'s) having it. *B* may have no reason to trust *A*'s judgment, since, from *B*'s perspective *A*'s judgment may simply seem illusory, a mere expression of *A*'s desire. Any such attempt of *A*'s to give *B* a reason would be structurally analogous to theoretical reason-giving. It could succeed *only-if* *B* has some reason to think there exists some evidentiary relation between A's judgment and the normative world it purports to represent.

At the same time, however, *A*'s expression of desire might give *B* pause in the credit she accords her own desire's appearance. From a first-person perspective, corrected only by further appearances that come with better informed desires and unchallenged by another's desires and will, *B* could comfortably credit the epistemic access she apparently got to reasons through her own desires. But now she sees that *A*'s desires appear to him to provide access to reasons no less than do *B*'s for her.

To be sure, there are ways that *A* and *B*'s conversation could progress within the space of (apparently) outcome-based reasons. *A* or *B* could come to care about the other through sympathetic concern and see the other's welfare (and, consequently, the other's having the apple) as a good thing. Or they might come to regard the practical experiences and desires of the other as no less evidentiary of desirable outcomes than their own. Any of these reasons, however, can only show why it would be a good thing for *A* or *B* or both to have the apple in whole or in part. It could not show why either might have a reasonable claim to the apple, whole or part, or show, consequently, why any particular disposition of the apple might be reasonable.[^30] In particular, abstracting from phenomena like diminishing marginal utility, nothing would recommend dividing the apple between them. And certainly there would be no place for the idea that either has any moral obligation, even *pro tanto,* to give any weight to the other's interest (or, indeed, to his own).

Suppose now that *A* lays a claim of any kind to the apple (or some part of it or chance for it) and addresses it second-personally to *B.* No matter what the basis of *A*'s claim is, *A* thereby presupposes a second-personal relation to *B. A* presupposes the standing to address the specific claim he makes, on whatever basis, and, therefore, a second-personal authority to make claims on another person at all. And if *B* takes up the claim, if only by giving it consideration publicly between them, then *B* implicitly acknowledges *A*'s second-personal authority, even if she rejects, on reflection, *A*'s specific claim. But likewise, in addressing his claim to *B, A* must simultaneously presuppose *B*'s second-personal authority. Finally, in acknowledging a claim or second-personal summons from *A,B* must also acknowledge, and presuppose in her practical reasoning, her own second-personal authority as a free and rational agent.

In the reciprocal recognition of the second-person standpoint, addresser and addressee are committed alike to their mutual accountability as equal free and rational persons, and this commits them to the demand for justification to one another, at least within the scope of their mutual accountability. Their reciprocal address commits them both also to a constraint of reasonableness of any demands they address; they must be able to expect their addressees to accept, or not reasonably to reject, their demands as free and rational persons, in light of their interest as independent, mutually accountable (second-personally competent) agents. It commits them both to imposing no demands on others that they would not also be prepared to impose upon themselves from a common standpoint they share as free and rational.

The second-person standpoint thus vindicates the reasonable and so grounds contractualist moral theory. By presupposing the equal dignity of persons, it commits us to contractualism's deepest idea: a community of mutually accountable free and rational persons.[^31] And in so doing, it gives us a reason of the right kind to comply with principles that mediate respect between mutually accountable equals.

[^1]: Have I shown that such reasons are supremely authoritative? If the argument of Chapter 10 is sound, we cannot avoid presupposing the equal dignity of free and rational persons when we address second-personal reasons of any kind. Since attempting to hold one another accountable through second-personal address itself apparently involves an assumption of the supremacy of the accountability-seeking second-personal reasons (see Chapter 5), it is hard to see how to avoid presupposing the supremacy of reasons of equal dignity.
[^2]: Complying with these principles is not, however, sufficient to manifest full respect for persons, as I argued in Chapter 6.
[^3]: I briefly discuss the accountability of human beings who are not fully morally competent in Chapter 4.

[^4]: For a very interesting set of reflections on giving responsibility to (other) animals, see Hearne 1986. I am indebted to Elizabeth Anderson for this reference.
[^5]: Recall, again, Strawson's remark that to respond to another with a reactive attitude is "to view him as a member of the moral community; only as one who offended against its demands" (1968: 93) and Adam Smith's claim that resentment aims to make another feel our dignity (1982: 95–96). See the discussion of both of these in Chapter 4. Cf. also Hegel's famous idea of the right to punishment (1991: §100).

[^6]: Rawls specifies these interests further by stipulating that the parties have "highestorder interests" in exercising their moral personality (living on terms of mutual respect) and in rationally choosing and revising their own conceptions of the good) and a "higherorder interest" in "protecting and advancing their conception of the good" (1980: 525). For a discussion of the so-called "Kantian interpretation" of Rawls's theory of justice, including of his idea of primary goods, see Darwall 1980. After his 1980 Dewey Lectures, Rawls presented his ideas wholly within the framework of political liberalism, and so turned away from questions of normative moral theory and from deeper philosophical rationales or other "comprehensive doctrines" that might be controversial in a liberal society.

[^7]: Rawls distinguishes between moral obligations and natural duties, reserving the term "obligation" for those that arise from some sort voluntary initiating act; however, this distinction does not matter for our purposes (1999: 93–101).
[^8]: Another example is Hill 1989. By contrast, "contractarianism" is the view that moral principles of right derive from a mutually advantageous contract, as in Harman 1977, Gauthier 1986, and, arguably, in Hobbes 1994. For a discussion of the differences between contractualism and contractarianism, see the introduction to Darwall 2002a.

[^9]: Assume, again, that such sanction is fully within normal practice, that it is subject to democratic citizen review, that it is applied with due process, and so on.
[^10]: This, again, is Pufendorf 's Point.
[^11]: Wood (1999) also thinks that the dignity of persons is Kant's fundamental idea, but unlike Wood, I believe neither that we can simply interpret FH directly, in its own terms, nor that the various universalization procedures, including FUL, should be ignored as empty or morally problematic. Furthermore, in my view, what is fundamental is not dignity as a freestanding value, but second-personal authority.

[^12]: This may seem to be incompatible with a Rawlsian version of contractualism, because the parties in the original position choose principles in a mutually disinterested way, as instrumentally rational in furthering their own (highest-order) interests as rational persons. But that would misunderstand the way in which the motivations of the parties works in combination with the veil of ignorance constraint. It would work equally well to suppose that the parties are trustees for an individual citizen and her interests (about whom the veil of ignorance prohibits further knowledge) and gave no weight to their own interests. The arguments from the original position would be exactly the same in both cases. On this point, see Darwall 1980: 340–343. Rawls notes this point himself (2001: 84–85).
[^13]: Kumar 2003 can be interpreted somewhat along these lines.

[^14]: This is a point about the "acceptance-utility" or "acceptance-consequences" of candidate principles, as opposed to their "conformance-utility" or "conformanceconsequences." See, for example, Lyons 1965. In Parfit's terms, act-consequentialism is "indirectly collectively self-defeating," and possibly also "self-effacing" (1984: 27–43). See also Hare 1981.
[^15]: See also Rawls 1955.
[^16]: Rawls denies this, arguing that the decision problem must be considered as one under uncertainty rather than under risk, in the technical decision-theoretic sense, and that the appropriate decision principle is maximin (1971: 154–157).

[^17]: Again, Rawls gives various reasons for rejecting the equi-probability assumption and treats the problem of choice as one of uncertainty rather than risk. We need take no stand on how cogent these reasons are. My point is that even if they aren't, and even if Kantian contractualism is a form of rule-consequentialism in a purely formal sense, nothing of theoretical importance hangs on this point. For example, it is consistent with this that the parties should also choose the Difference Principle (that is, that the Difference Principle would satisfy a rule-consequentialism of this formal kind).
[^18]: I am indebted to Allan Gibbard for discussion of these points.

[^19]: Cf. Scanlon: "The fact that it would be a good thing if people were discouraged from [certain] actions by threat of legal punishment and social disapproval, or by an ingrained tendency to feel disapproval toward themselves, could provide a reason to acquire such a tendency, but that does not amount to a reason not to so act. What we need to do, then, is to explain more clearly how the idea that an act is wrong flows from the idea that there is an objection of a certain kind to people's being allowed to perform such actions, and we need to do this in a way that makes clear how an act's being wrong in the sense described can provide a reason not to do it" (1998: 153).
[^20]: For a defense of "particularism" in ethics, see Dancy 1993, 2001, and 2004. John McDowell (1979) is another influential source of the idea that ethical ideas, especially those relating to the virtues, are uncodifiable.

[^21]: This I take it, is the correct response to the criticism that Rawls's constraint that the parties to the original position choose candidate principles as public principles of justice begs the question against utilitarianism. Although this condition may seem ad hoc when considered in relation to ethics more generally, it is utterly central to any adequate theory of moral right to which we are appropriately held publicly accountable.
[^22]: For a more extended discussion, see Darwall 1994, which I draw on here. For relevant discussion concerning the broader context of liberal democratic moral debate, Railton 1992.
[^24]: This is the deep connection between positive social science and liberal moral and political theory.

[^23]: Also, concerning someone who would put forward "his own *unfounded* sentiments" (i.e., unfounded in an extrinsic ground), Bentham says, "let him ask himself whether his principle is not despotical" (1962: 3).
[^25]: For other arguments along similar lines, see Bond 1983; Dancy 2000; Darwall 1983; Hampton 1998; Pettit and Smith 1990; Quinn 1991.
[^26]: See especially Scanlon's description of the "three-part strategy" (1998: 166–168).

[^27]: For the "buck-passing" analysis of value, see Scanlon 1998: 11, 95–100.
[^28]: The relation, again, is that it is because of moral obligation's essential tie to mutual accountability that its reasons must purport to be supreme. For this argument, see Chapter 5.
[^29]: With the usual caveats about children and other nonstandard cases, impure address, and so on.
[^30]: I am indebted here to conversation with Mark van Roojen.
[^31]: Elizabeth Anderson (1999) proposes what she calls a "relational theory of equality" along these lines. I am much indebted to her work.
