# PART IV

## 9. Morality and Autonomy in Kant

We have been concerned since Chapter 3 with the second-person standpoint's involvement in our moral conceptions and psychology. In this and the following two chapters, we turn to questions of more fundamental justification. What can vindicate these aspects of our moral thought? How can we account for the normativity that a law proclaiming equal dignity purports to have?

We owe the most compelling and systematic account of morality as respect for the equal dignity of persons to Kant. In this chapter, we consider Kant's own defense of the moral law's supreme authority, both his constructive argument in the *Groundwork* and the "fact of reason" in the *Critique of Practical Reason.* Each gives a central role to the distinctive freedom that Kant calls "autonomy"—"the property of the will by which it is a law to itself independently of any property of the objects of volition" (1996b: 440)—and to a claimed equivalence between morality and this freedom that Allison calls the "Reciprocity Thesis." As Allison formulates this Kantian doctrine, "freedom of the will is not only a necessary but also a sufficient condition of the moral law"(1986: 395). The moral law, and hence the dignity of persons, entails autonomy and vice versa. In the *Groundwork,* Kant puts this equivalence claim to constructive use, arguing that autonomy is a necessary presupposition of the deliberative standpoint and that we can infer the supremacy of the moral law from this independent premise. In the *Critique of Practical Reason,* Kant abandons this strategy and argues that the awareness of autonomy comes itself only through the recognition that we are bound by the moral law (the fact of reason).

In my view, both approaches fail to satisfy completely. The most we can get from the fact of reason is not an account of, nor any warrant for, the purported authority of moral obligation, but only the reassurance that we do not need such an account since we are convinced of morality's authority already. That may be, but stilling skeptical worries is not the only purpose that such an account might serve. We might also reasonably wish for a better understanding of what Korsgaard (1996e) calls the "source" of the moral law's normativity. The constructive arguments of the *Groundwork* aim to provide such an understanding, but I shall argue that Kant's official argument in *Groundwork* 3, as well as arguments that philosophers have recently constructed from materials in *Groundwork* 1 and 2, all ultimately break down. (e.g., those of Korsgaard 1996b, 1996e, 1996f; Wood 1999). I believe they all fail for a common reason, namely, because they aim to derive the moral law from presuppositions of a (firstperson) deliberative standpoint alone.

As I see it, any such argument is bound to fail, since nothing in the bare project of acting for reasons, first-personally, commits a deliberating agent to autonomy as Kant defines it. I sketch this diagnosis in a preliminary way presently. First, however, we should note that even if Kant's argument were successful in these terms, it would still not fully capture, and therefore would not adequately vindicate, the distinctive normativity of moral obligations. The reason, as I have stressed in earlier chapters, is that moral obligation's purported normativity includes an irreducibly second-personal element. Moral obligations do not simply purport to provide supremely authoritative reasons. They are also what we are responsible for doing, what members of the moral community have the authority to demand that we do. And even if an argument of some other kind could show that moral obligations invariably provide overriding reasons, there is no way to establish accountability except within a second-personal framework. That is the lesson of Strawson's Point, or, as I have consistently put it: "Second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in." It follows, I believe, that the normativity of moral obligation cannot possibly be vindicated outside a second-person point of view.

Moreover, I believe that it is also impossible, outside the second-person standpoint, to establish that moral obligations are binding in the more familiar sense of providing supremely authoritative reasons.[^1] Kant's strategy in *Groundwork* 3 is to argue that autonomy is an inescapable presupposition of deliberation and then to derive the validity of the moral law from that assumption. I agree with Kant that autonomy of the will is a deepfeature of practical reason. But I disagree with his claim in *Groundwork* 3 that autonomy (as Kant understands it) must be presupposed in any intelligible (first-personal) deliberation. As I see it, autonomy and the dignity of persons, in the form of second-personal competence and second-personal authority, are presuppositions we are committed to from a second-person point of view.

The basic problem for Kant's argument in *Groundwork* 3 stems from the fact that as Kant defines autonomy of the will, it has no structural analogue in theoretical reason. This means that if Kant is to argue that autonomy is an inescapable presupposition of the practical standpoint, he must show how deliberation about what to do unavoidably presupposes a kind of freedom that other types of reasoning do not presuppose.[^2] But the only kinds of freedom that he plausibly identifies as inescapable presuppositions of practical reasoning in *Groundwork* 3 are ones that are common also to theoretical reasoning. As Kant there puts it, reason cannot "receive direction" from outside in making "judgments" in any area in which it is employed (1996b: 448).

If there were a theoretical analogue of autonomy of the will, there would have to be formal norms (like the Categorical Imperative) that ground reasons for belief that are no less substantive than moral reasons concerning the dignity of persons. Some norms of theoretical reasoning do apparently derive from the "form" of belief. For example, because belief necessarily aims at the true, beliefs are subject to formal norms of consistency and coherence. But these just rule out combinations of belief as incoherent or inconsistent; they do not rule in any beliefs in particular, even *pro tanto.*[^3] As Kant understands autonomy of the will, however, it has normative implications that go significantly beyond norms of practical coherence and consistency, like principles of instrumental reasoning and the formal theory of rational choice. If that were all it involved, autonomy could not entail the moral law.

Similarly, logical beliefs are also arguably grounded in the form of belief. But these are significantly less substantive than the moral law also. To be sure, it is central to Kant's critical theoretical philosophy that a critique of pure reason can yield synthetic *a priori* truths such as the principle of universal causation. But if we look for practical analogues of theoretical principles like the causal principle, or inference to the best explanation, even these fall short of the CI except, perhaps in its truistic form: "Act only on universal laws (or on maxims that could be universal laws)." This is significantly weaker even than "Act only on maxims you could *will* to be universal law," not to mention the Formula of Humanity. What's more, a convincing argument for autonomy should not rest on controverted questions of Kant's transcendental idealism.

If Kant is to argue successfully that the practical standpoint unavoidably presupposes autonomy, then, he must show that it presupposes a kind of freedom that is unlike any we inescapably presuppose in theoretical reasoning. I argue that he fails and, moreover, that any such attempt must fail since, so far as the presuppositions of intelligible (first-personal) deliberation go, reasons for acting might all derive from the features of the objects of the will rather than from its form. To make this possibility vivid, I consider what practical reasoning would be like from a *naïve (first-person) practical standpoint.*

Suppose someone desires some state, *p.*[^4] In (intrinsically) desiring *p,* she sees *p* as (intrinsically) desirable; she takes features of *p* as warranting a desire that *p* and, *pro tanto,* as warranting actions that might bring *p* about (Bond 1983; Dancy 2000; Darwall 1983; Hampton 1998; Pettit and Smith 1990; Quinn 1991; Scanlon 1998: 41–55). From the practical point of view, desires are "backgrounded," as beliefs are from the theoretical (Pettit and Smith 1990). Suppose that *p* is relief of your pain. To someone who desires this, it will seem as if there are aspects of your being in pain and being relieved from it, respectively, that are reasons to desire your relief. And these reasons will also seem reasons to do *A,* if *A* will bring that about. In a case of this kind, reasons for doing *A* seem to come not from the form of the will but from "propert[ies] of the object of volition," since they apparently come from the object of desire (although not, again, as desired; like belief, desire is in the background).

A *naïve practical reasoner* deliberates about what to do from the perspective of (critically revised) beliefs and desires. For such an agent, desires (and related mental states like pleasure and enjoyment) seem responsive to the value or desirability of outcomes or possible states of affairs. The agent reasons from premises drawn from the content of her beliefs and desires, not from anything about their form. Moreover, for such an agent, practical reasoning is structurally analogous to theoretical reasoning. When we reason from our beliefs, what we take as premises are putative facts about the world as they seem to us from the perspective of our beliefs. And when we reason from our desires (understood as involving evaluations of possible states of the world), our premises are putative facts about how it would be desirable for the world to be, as this seems from the perspective of our desires.[^5]

I do not, of course, accept this naïve picture of the will. But the question remains: What rules it out? I argue that nothing in the conditions of intelligible first-personal deliberation does. In my view, it takes second-personal address to dispel the naïvete´. This is an aspect of Fichte's Point. It is what we come simultaneously to presuppose and discover about the nature of our agency from a second-person standpoint that excludes the heteronomy of naïve practical reasoning. The full implications of Fichte's Point are, first, that the second-person perspective invariably presupposes autonomy and the dignity of persons understood, respectively, as second-personal competence and second-personal authority (Chapter 10), and, second, that this standpoint reveals a fundamental difference in the kinds of freedom that theoretical and practical reason respectively involve (Chapter 11).

If the arguments of Chapters 10 and 11 can be made out, then, we will have a vindication of the normativity that the moral law purports to have. The burden of this chapter, however, is to show why arguments that remain within a first-person standpoint alone, like Kant's, are bound to fail.[^6] Only by being enriched second-personally can a more "sophisticated" first-personal deliberation arise within which the key Kantian concepts of autonomy and dignity can play the deliberative roles Kant gives them.[^7]

### **The Need for a Vindication of Morality/Autonomy**

At a remarkable juncture in the *Groundwork,* at the end of section 2, Kant notes that it is consistent with his arguments to that point that morality might be nothing but a "figment of the mind" (2002: 445).[^8] He believes that he has already shown in sections 1 and 2 that morality is "grounded on . . . autonomy of the will" (1996b: 445). Morality's fundamental principle is, he has argued, the CI, and that holds *only-if* the will can be subject to a law solely by virtue of its form and independently of any properties of its objects (its content or "matter"). Conversely, he has argued that autonomy implies the CI. By the end of section 2, then, the Reciprocity Thesis has been established.

But so far Kant's arguments have been entirely analytic. He has analyzed the "generally accepted" concept of morality and found it to involve autonomy of the will (1996b: 445). And conversely, he has argued that the very idea of a will bound only by its form entails the CI (402, 420– 421). All this shows, however, is that if there is such a thing as morality, then the will must have autonomy, and if there is such a thing as autonomy of the will, then the moral law (the CI) must be the will's law. It is thus consistent with the arguments in sections 1 and 2 of the *Groundwork* that the moral law, the dignity of persons, the CI, and autonomy of the will are all "chimerical idea[s]" (445). Neither autonomy nor morality follows from the Reciprocity Thesis. All that follows is that they stand or fall together.

Autonomy of the will and the CI both require "a possible synthetic use of practical reason," so neither can be established analytically. Both require a "critique" of practical reason of the sort that Kant embarks on in *Groundwork*'s section 3 (1996b: 445). Before we examine this, however, we should get some of the chief elements of Kant's action theory before us.

### **Kant's Action Theory**

"Desire," according to Kant, "is the faculty to be, by means of one's representations, the cause of the objects of these representations" (1996a: 9n; 1996e: 211). Desire and belief both involve representations of possible states of the world. Belief, we might say, is the "faculty" to be, by means of the world, the cause of one's representations' fitting the world. And desire is the faculty to be, by means of one's representations, the cause of the world's fitting one's representations.[^9]

Not all behavior that results from beliefs and desires involves rational agency or the will. Indeed, by Kant's lights, not even all behavior that results from beliefs and desires in a "rationalizing," teleological way necessarily involves rational will.[^10] Kant defines the will as "the capacity to act in accordance with the representation of laws" or "principles." Willed action is invariably undertaken, therefore, on some (putatively) rational principle or norm; it must involve normative acceptance (1996b: 412).[^11]

By the same token, however, an act's resulting from a desire does not preclude it from being an instance of genuine agency nor, indeed, from involving pure practical reason (and, as Kant believes, autonomy). If the principle on which an agent acts is itself "precede[d]" by a desire that furnishes "the condition of its becoming a principle," then the principle is "empirical."[^12] It is unable to "furnish a practical law," and the will is heteronomous (1996a: 21, 33). Autonomy of the will, pure reason's being "of itself practical," is realized *only-if* "reason can determine the faculty of desire as such" (1996e: 213).

Thus, Kant grants that all actions result from desire. What he denies is that all desires are "object-dependent;" some are "principle-dependent" (Rawls 2000: 150–151). Some desires arise not as apparent responses to represented possible states of the world or outcomes but because the agent accepts some norm or principle of action independently of the properties of any desired or desirable state.[^13] Autonomy is realized *only-when* an activating desire is thoroughly principle- rather than objectdependent, that is, when the desire depends on a principle and that principle is not itself "empirical" (based on a prior desire) or derived from the value (e.g., the desirability) of an independent outcome or state.[^14] Autonomy thus depends on the possibility of an agent's accepting and acting on a normative principle that grounds substantive reasons for action independently of her regard for any object or state that might be an outcome of her action. Most obviously, the agent's acceptance of the principle must be independent of any desire for some state or outcome, even one as cognitively rich as sympathetic concern. Less obviously, but no less importantly, autonomy requires that the agent's acceptance of the principle be independent also of any putative evaluation of some outcome or state (like a Moorean intuition that a possible state is intrinsically good or "ought to exist for its own sake" [Moore 1993: 34]).

We can put this point by saying that the agent's valuing an outcome and even the outcome's having value, say, its being desirable, are reasons of the wrong kind to ground accepting a principle if that acceptance is to manifest autonomy. Or, equivalently, instrumental reasons are reasons of the wrong kind. "*Good* or *evil,*" Kant says, "always signifies a reference to the *will*" (1996a: 60). Autonomy requires reason-grounding norms of action "all the way down," that is, principles that are binding on the agent at the most fundamental level simply as a rational agent (among others), independently of the value of any possible state of the world. Only so can the will be "a law to itself independently of any property of the objects of volition" (1996b: 440).[^15]

There is one other essential aspect of Kantian autonomy, which will occupy us more later, that can be appreciated by contrasting Kant's idea with rational intuitionism of the deontological sort held by Richard Price (1974) and W. D. Ross (1930).[^16] Deontological intuitionists differ from consequentialist intuitionists like Moore in holding that there are fundamental norms of action that do not derive from the value of outcomes. Consider, for example, a Rossian who holds that there is a *pro tanto* moral duty to keeppromises that is self-evident *a priori.* Can the acceptance of this principle after a deontological intuitionist fashion manifest Kantian autonomy? I think the answer has to be "no." To be sure, such an acceptance is not based on features of any object of the agent's desire or on the independent desirability of any possible state of the world. So any desire an agent acts on because she accepts this principle as self-evident *a priori* will be principle-dependent rather than object-dependent. But her acceptance of the principle will nonetheless be based on "propert[ies] of the objec[t] of [her] volition," independently of anything about the form of the will (Kant 1996b: 440). She accepts the principle because (as she believes) promise-keeping is (self-evidently) intrinsically right *(pro tanto).* She doesn't accept the principle of keeping promises because it follows from some formal principle of the will like the CI. Her acceptance derives rather from intrinsic features of promise-keeping and the property of rightness that she takes to supervene upon these.

Having noted this deontological intuitionist form of heteronomy, I want to set it aside. We return to it later when we consider Kant's account of the "fact of reason." If Kant is to vindicate autonomy as non-illusory within a critique of practical reason, he must argue that the practical standpoint rules out broadly intuitionist views of both consequentialist and deontological varieties. To show that Kant's own attempted vindication fails, therefore, it will be enough to show that it does not rule out the consequentialist variety, and this is what I focus on.

A few final clarificatory remarks. First, I should stress again that I am not defending the consequentialist picture. I am arguing that the materials that Kant brings to bear in *Groundwork* 3 do not rule it out and that it takes the second-person standpoint to do so. So, second, although I agree that autonomy is a deepfeature of practical reason, I deny that it can be established in the way Kant tries in *Groundwork* 3. And third, I agree with Kant that autonomy is a presupposition of moral obligation and the dignity of persons. But again, I do so because I think these ideas have an irreducibly second-personal element that presupposes autonomy.

### **Vindicating Morality/Autonomy in** *Groundwork* **3**

Kant begins section 3 with interrelated definitions of will and freedom: "*Will* is a kind of causality of living beings insofar as they are rational," and freedom is "that property of such causality that it can be efficient independently of alien causes *determining* it" (1996b: 446). Kant points out that this defines freedom only negatively, so it must be inadequate. A random "choice"-generating device might operate independently of external causes, but it would not be a free will. The will is, or includes, practical reason, so it must involve guidance by "practical laws" ("laws of freedom"), that is, by valid norms of practical reason (448).[^17] Therefore, although freedom is "not a property of the will in accordance with natural laws," it "is not for that reason lawless but must instead be a causality in accordance with immutable laws of a special kind" (446). An adequate definition of the will must therefore include both a negative and a positive concept of freedom. A will determines itself independently of alien causes (negative freedom) and in accordance with rational norms (positive freedom).

Kant realizes that it doesn't follow from these reflections that we actually are free, in either a negative or a positive sense. What we have so far is actually just another reciprocity thesis, this time between the will, on the one hand, and negative and positive freedom, on the other. If the will exists, then so do negative and positive freedom, and vice versa. It is consistent with that being the case, however, that the will and negative and positive freedom are all "chimerical ideas."

What gets us inside this circle of concepts, according to *Groundwork* 3, is the idea of an inescapable presupposition of the deliberative standpoint:

> I say now: every being that cannot act otherwise than *under the idea of freedom* is just because of that really free in a practical respect, that is, all laws that are inseparably bound up with freedom hold for him just as if his will had been validly pronounced free also in itself and in theoretical philosophy. (1996b: 448)

Kant's strategy is as follows. We assume the Reciprocity Thesis as already established, hence that autonomy entails the bindingness of the moral law. And then we attempt to show that any deliberating agent must presuppose autonomy. It will then follow from the Reciprocity Thesis that any deliberating agent must also presuppose that she is bound by the moral law. And, if that is so, then, for practical purposes, she *is* bound by the moral law. The possibility that she might not be bound by it, or that she is bound by some conflicting alternative practical law (say, one that counsels her to produce more valuable states of affairs even when this conflicts with the moral law) is something she must reject as a condition of the intelligibility of her own deliberation.

This would be an excellent strategy, if it could be pulled off. It is, indeed, difficult to see how a norm that a deliberating agent is bound to accept as a condition of the intelligibility of her own deliberation could fail to apply to her validly. And it may seem an initially promising strategy also. It seems quite plausible that presuppositions of negative and positive freedom in at least some of the senses that Kant mentions are indeed necessary for deliberation to be intelligible.

Take negative freedom, for example. To be negatively free, I must be able to deliberate about what to do and to act on my deliberations "independently of alien causes determining" me. Whether I am negatively free in this sense, I cannot, of course, say. But if we interpret "alien causes" as causes that might interfere with my reasoning, it certainly seems that I must deliberate under the assumption that I am. Serious practical deliberation just is the attempt to work out what there are reasons to do for the purpose of acting on them. To count as deliberating at all, I must proceed under the assumption that my thinking rationally, or acting on practical reasons, is not precluded by "alien causes" in this sense.[^18]

The situation is identical with positive freedom, understood as the internal capacity to deliberate in accordance with and to act on rational norms. Here again, for me sensibly to deliberate about what to do, I must presuppose that I can do so in accord with rational norms and act on the upshot of my deliberation. To understand myself as deliberating at all, I must proceed on the assumption that I can think about what to do rationally.

Now so far, it is important to see that the relevant presuppositions of negative and positive freedom are in no way unique to or distinctive of practical reasoning. Whether one is deliberating about what to believe, what to feel, or what to do, one must assume that one can think free of alien causes and in accordance with rational norms. And Kant says as much: "One cannot possibly think of a reason that would consciously receive direction from any other quarter with respect to its judgments, since the subject would then attribute the determination of his judgment not to his reason but to an impulse" (1996b: 448). This is true of reason in all its employments. Whenever we make normative judgments concerning what there is reason to believe, feel, or do, we must presuppose negative and positive freedom in the sense that our judgments are free of alien causes and in accordance with rational norms.

So far, so good. However, Kant also claims that the positive freedom he has identified is the same thing as autonomy of the will. "What, then, can freedom of the will be other than autonomy, that is, the will's property of being a law to itself?" (1996b: 447). But why should we suppose that? The only sense in which Kant has vindicated a presupposition of positive freedom is one that is common to both practical and to theoretical reason. And, as we have seen, autonomy of the will has no structural analogue in theoretical reasoning. So the kinds of freedom that theoretical and practical reasoning presuppose in common cannot entail autonomy.

Perhaps, however, there is something about the practical standpoint in particular that requires a deliberating agent to presuppose autonomy. Consider, then, how deliberation might proceed from a naïve (firstperson) practical perspective. The primitive deliberative phenomenon is taking some fact about the world as a reason to do something. Wondering how to spend a free evening, I scan the newspaper to find an attractive possibility, say, going to watch a film. What I take as reasons for desiring to go, and for actually going, are aspects of the possible state of seeing the film on whose basis I might want to see it, or, if I cannot articulate these, the fact that, as it might seem to me, seeing the film would be good or desirable, a possible state or outcome that there is some reason to bring about.[^19] Evidently enough, then, if I decide to go for that or these reasons, my reasons for going will derive from properties of the object of my desire (and so my volition); it will depend on good-making features of the possible state of the world that would be the outcome of my action as these seem from my perspective. Equally evident, I have not had to suppose that these reasons come from the form of the will.

But do we yet have genuine agency and a will? For Kant, rational action involves not just beliefs and desires, but also some norm or principle the agent accepts and implicitly make her own in acting on it (1996b: 412; 1999: 23–24). For intelligent pursuit of an outcome I desire to involve my will, I must deliberate on the basis of some rational norm, one I take to apply validly to any possible rational agent. And I must presuppose that I am bound by such norms as a condition of the intelligibility of my own deliberation. But does this require me to presuppose autonomy? For this assumption to amount to autonomy, I would have to be required by the logic of my deliberative situation to presuppose that (at least some) reason-generating norms are valid independently of any properties of the objects that I am counseled by them to bring about. What in the deliberative context forces me to assume this?

Consider what norm I might accept in deciding to go to the film because I expect the state of seeing it to be good (for whatever goodmaking reasons my consideration of the state presents me with). The state of my seeing the film will seem to me to be an intrinsically good thing,[^20] a state that, in Moore's words, ought to exist for its own sake.[^21] So a natural answer to the question what norm I might accept is Moore's answer. I might accept the act-consequentialist norm of always doing whatever promotes good or desirable states or outcomes, and think, in accepting that, that any rational agent should do likewise.

Now I am not saying, I should make clear, that anything in the deliberative context would force the acceptance of this norm. I am just saying that nothing seems to preclude it and that accepting it would seem quite natural from a naïve practical standpoint. Just as belief aims at accurate representation of the world as it actually is, so from the naïve practical standpoint of an agent with desires might action seem to be for bringing about intrinsically desirable states or outcomes, as these seem from the perspective of her desires.[^22]

This was Moore's view in *Principia.* Indeed, he there held that there is only one fundamental ethical concept, the notion of intrinsic value or of something's being such as "ought to exist for its own sake." And he concluded that the concept of an action's being right (or what one ought) to do is conceptually reducible to that of intrinsic value and empirical causal concepts: "To assert that a certain line of conduct is, at a given time, absolutely right or obligatory is obviously to assert that more good or less evil will exist in the world, if it be adopted than if anything else be done instead" (Moore 1993: §17, 77).

Now Moore's (conceptual) definitional claim is surely a mistake, as his famous open question argument can be employed to show. Anyone who, knowing that one course of action will produce the best states, asks whether there might nonetheless be better reason to do something else (say, not to repay a loan to a seditious bigot), clearly asks an open question.[^23] And someone who asserts that there is an overriding reason to repay the loan, even at the cost of producing less desirable states, clearly does not contradict himself. So the concept of there being reason to do something is distinct from the concept of the action's being one that will bring about the most desirable feasible states. Even so, someone might quite coherently and, from a naïve deliberative standpoint, quite naturally, think that although these are distinct concepts, considerations of the desirability of outcomes provide the only reasons for action. She might accept the Moorean doctrine not as a definition of right or ought to do but as a fundamental normative principle.[^24]

Practical reasoning on the consequentialist principle is in an important sense formally analogous to theoretical reasoning about what to believe. It can be factored into two parts, along the lines of Moore's definition. One part is theoretical reasoning pure and simple, working out everything one can do and the long-term consequences, that is, determining for every feasible act, how the world would be if it were done.[^25] The other is ethical, evaluating all possible states of affairs to determine which "ought to exist" and to what degree. But although the thought that a possible state is good or ought to exist differs, of course, from the thought that a state actually exists in fact, it has the same structure. Both are stateof-the-world-regarding. We can think of thoughts of the former kind as given in desire and thoughts of the latter kind as given in belief. Naïve deliberation under the influence of desire and belief, regimented with the Moorean principle, then becomes the determination of which available action would bring about the most valuable states, with this being determined under the influence of the agent's (critically informed) beliefs and desires.

But do we have an agent even yet? Obviously, a creature who deliberates about what to do simply from the perspective of her current desires and beliefs, and who is incapable of stepping back and critically revising these, is not an agent in any sense we should be interested in here. A deliberating agent must, as Korsgaard says, both be, and be able see herself as, "something over and above" her desires who "chooses which desire to act on" (1996e: 100). But it is quite possible for a naïve agent to do that without assuming Kantian autonomy of the will. Although she will, of course, have to assume autonomy in the familiar sense of being able to act on critically revised desires and so to make her actions "her own" (e.g., Dworkin 1988). As we have been thinking of it, the naïve agent's desires are identified with her current evaluations of the value of the possible states of the world that are their objects. She can certainly step back from these and reevaluate, getting a better conception of the features of these states on which she takes their value to supervene and, hence, of their value.

Just as a theoretical reasoner can bring experience and reflection to bear on the dispositions to belief involved in her current experiences, for example, overriding or defeating any tendency to believe that an apparently bent stick in water before her really is bent, so also can a naïve practical reasoner analogously critically revise her desires. A naïve deliberating jogger encountering a charging dog, for example, might draw on past experience and reflection to override a strong tendency of fight or flight and form a desire to continue at his leisurely pace while keeping his hands relaxed with palms down and feigning indifference.

Plainly, this picture of deliberation is still much too naïve. For one thing, although an implicitly realist epistemology can seem quite plausible for theoretical reasoning, it can be difficult to see how to understand the intrinsic desirability of states metaphysically and how to guarantee the right kind of epistemic relation between desires (or intuitive evaluations of desirability) and the intrinsic value of states so understood. For another, this picture assumes that rational deliberation is in its nature instrumental, and we have no good reason to believe that. But my point in providing this consequentialist sketch is not to defend it, but to suggest that it bears at least some resemblance to the way things seem from a naïve deliberative standpoint and to ask what in the presuppositions of any intelligible practical reasoning rules this picture out. So far as I can see, nothing does. Deliberation on this basis is surely intelligible, even if it is mistaken.

Thus, although intelligible deliberation must presuppose positive freedom of some form, it need not presuppose autonomy of the will. If it is sufficiently naïve, it can coherently proceed by assuming a kind of positive freedom that is formally analogous, in the sense I've illustrated, to what we must presuppose in theoretical reasoning. A naïve practical reasoner may intelligibly assume that her reasoning is guided by norms that derive ultimately from the nature and value of its objects (the world as it ought to be), just as a theoretical reasoner must assume that his reasoning is guided by norms that depend on its relation to its objects (the world as it actually is). It follows that Kant's argument for autonomy in *Groundwork* 3 fails.

### **Other Arguments in the** *Groundwork*

Perhaps, however, other arguments in the *Groundwork* can vindicate autonomy and the moral law. One that has been much discussed recently is Kant's "derivation" of the second formulation of the CI, the Formula of Humanity (FH): "So act that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means" (1996b: 430; see especially Korsgaard 1996f and Wood 1999: 124–132). Although Kant himself explicitly notes that the argument for FH in section 2 depends on assumptions that he will only later attempt to prove in section 3 (in the argument just canvassed) (1996b: 429n), it is sometimes put forward as a freestanding argument.

Christine Korsgaard and Allen Wood present Kant's argument for FH as a "regress of conditions."[^26] The argument takes two somewhat different forms. One proceeds from a premise about the kind of valuation of ends in general that any practical reasoning necessarily involves (the "value of ends" argument). And a second proceeds from the kind of value that any deliberating agent must attribute specifically to her own rational agency (the "value of agency" argument).

The "value of ends" argument begins with the premise that when an agent acts for a reason, she must act for some end that she regards as objectively valuable (Korsgaard 1996e: 122; Wood 1999: 129). It then claims that an end can have objective value *only-if* something is the source of its value (or, as it is also sometimes put, if the "conditions" of its having objective value are realized).[^27] In one way this claim is uncontroversial. If there are conditions on some end's being valuable, and if whether there is reason to do something depends on the value of that end, then in acting for that reason, the agent must presuppose that the relevant conditions hold.

The argument then shifts to what an agent must presuppose to be the condition or source of the value of her ends and what follows from this. Korsgaard puts Kant's argument as follows.

He asked what it is that makes these objects good, and, rejecting one form of realism, he decided that the goodness was not in the objects themselves.... Kant saw that we take things to be important because they are important to us—and he concluded that we must therefore take ourselves to be important. (1996e: 122)

Wood puts a similar formulation by saying that "we can regard this goodness [i.e., the objective goodness that we must see our ends as having] as originating only in the fact that we have set [the] en[d] according to reason... Rational choice of ends is the act through which *objective* goodness enters the world." Wood concludes on Kant's behalf that "the source of all such value is nothing but the value of rational willing itself, which can confer objective value on other things *only-if* it is presupposed that it has objective value" (1999: 129–130).

Now in one sense it is uncontroversial that an end an agent sets for herself has objective value *only-if* choosing the end accords with reason. Consequentialist realists like Moore can agree, since they will take it that a valuing fails to accord with reason when it fails to accord with facts about the value of possible states of the world that provide reasons for choice.[^28] What they are bound to reject is that laws of practical reason are formal (have their source in the form of the will) and hence that the desirability of outcomes and the choiceworthiness of actions depends on whether they can be desired or willed in accordance with such formal laws. What they assert is heteronomy: the laws of practical reason are given by the independent value of outcomes or possible states of the world, to which desires and evaluations of states apparently respond.

It is clear, however, from Korsgaard's opposing the premise to a form of realism that Kant meant to reject ("substantive realism" of the sort Moore is generally thought to represent), that the premise of her argument already rules out heteronomy, and so simply assumes autonomy of the will.[^29] But if, as Kant believes, nothing can warrant that assumption other than a critique of practical reason of the sort he undertakes in *Groundwork* 3, then, so far as the materials of the *Groundwork* go, the resulting argument for FH must ultimately depend on the argument for autonomy in *Groundwork* 3, which we have already found wanting.

Again, I should stress that I can agree with the premise of the Korsgaard/Wood argument for FH. My point is that we don't have an argument for it in the materials provided either by *Groundwork* 3 or by contemporary attempts to buttress these. I believe that it takes materials provided by the second-person standpoint to establish all three of the following: the dignity of persons, the CI, and autonomy.[^30]

It follows that without an argument for autonomy already on hand, the "value of ends" argument cannot establish FH. What, then, about the "value of agency" argument? This version finds better support within Kant's own text.

The human being necessarily represents his own existence [as a rational agent] in this way [as an end in itself]; so far it is thus a *subjective* principle of human actions. But every other rational being also represents his existence in this way consequent on just the same rational ground that also holds for me; thus it is at the same time an *objective* principle from which, as a supreme practical ground, it must be possible to derive all laws of the will. (Kant 1996b: 429)

This passage directly precedes Kant's statement of FH, so it can reasonably be interpreted as intended to support it.

Now there are uncontroversial senses in which a deliberating agent must treat her own rational agency as an end in itself. For purposes of her deliberation, she has no rational alternative but to value thinking and acting rationally, at least implicitly. If this has no value, then she should be doing something else rather than deliberating. And she must also assume the value of reasoning well. Deliberation is something one can do at all only by trying to do it properly. In these senses, a presupposition of the value of rational practical thinking is simply built into deliberation. Moreover, serious deliberation, by its very nature, attempts not just to answer, as it were, the advisor's question: "What is the best advice to give myself about what to do?" It attempts also to direct the will rationally. In all these senses, a presupposition of the value of rational agency is simply part of serious deliberation.

But that seems to be as far as the presuppositions that are necessary for first-personal reasoning go.[^31] I could quite intelligibly deliberate under the assumption that, although my rational thought has great value now, it might not some time from now (a reason for me to deliberate now rather than then).[^32] It is not obvious, of course, how I could possibly justify such an assumption. But there is nothing incoherent in it, and the assumption would be perfectly compatible with intelligible deliberation. And I could certainly think that the value of my thinking and acting rationally in the future is overridden by other values if, for example, I were given a Hobson's choice in which I could continue as a wellfunctioning rational agent only at the cost, say, of my children's lives.

Moreover, in none of these senses, it is important to see, does valuing my own rational agency (now) commit me to valuing others'. For example, when I deliberate, I authorize my own rational thought and agency, in the sense of presupposing that I am (now anyway) competent to judge reasons and to act on them.[^33] But nothing in that authorization commits me either to thinking it present in others, or even to thinking that it will continue through time in me. I am, of course, bound to recognize that others are committed to their own rational authority insofar as they deliberate, but that doesn't mean that I must authorize them, or even that they are committed to authorizing themselves in the future. I might think that I or they, or that both of us, are simply not to be trusted as practical reasoners in the future. Neither is it the case that to deliberate intelligibly now, I must think that I have reason to promote or respect their, or even my own future, rational agency. Again, I am not saying for a moment that there is any justification for thinking any of these things. I am just saying that they seem not to be ruled out by any norms that are constitutive of the very activity of rational deliberation. Someone would certainly still count as deliberating if she accepted them, though she wouldn't, for example, if she didn't seek normative reasons for acting or assume that she can think rationally for purposes of her own current deliberation.

These possibilities can all be made vivid by considering the Moorean picture that I have been suggesting is the natural way of seeing things from a naïve first-person deliberative standpoint. From this perspective, rational authority is fundamentally epistemic; anyone's title, one's own or anyone else's, ultimately depends on how reliably his or her thinking reflects an independent order of facts about the world and the intrinsic value of possible outcomes. So viewed, rational authority can be defeated or earned just as epistemic authority is in theoretical reasoning. Clearly enough, taking one's own powers of inquiry to warrant trust in the present moment does not commit one now to trusting one's past or future judgment or to trusting now the judgment of any other would-be inquirer. Engaging another in a serious conversation about what to believe does implicitly grant epistemic authority to the other, as we saw in Chapter 3. But first-personal theoretical reasoning need not grant such authority, and neither must first-personal practical reasoning if it takes a naïvely consequentialist, Moorean form.

It is significant, therefore, that when Kant says that every "rational being also represents his existence on just the same rational ground that holds for me," he remarks in a footnote that he "here put[s] forward this proposition as a postulate" and that "the grounds for it will be found in the last Section" (1996b: 429n). This shows a recognition on Kant's part that in order for a rational agent's claim of the value of his own rational nature to entail the Formula of Humanity, it must itself be grounded in autonomy of the will. But if that is so, any such claim that does not already presuppose autonomy will be insufficiently strong to entail the moral law, and, as we have already seen, Kant doesn't think that anything he has said in sections 1 and 2 proves autonomy. He believes that the arguments he provides before section 3 are consistent with the moral law and autonomy of the will both being chimerical ideas.[^34] Consequently, the *Groundwork*'s case for the vindication of dignity and the moral law ultimately hangs on the argument of *Groundwork* 3, and, as we have seen, that argument does not work.

### **The Fact of Reason**

By the time he wrote the *Critique of Practical Reason,* Kant had apparently given upon the strategy of *Groundwork* 3. In the second *Critique,* he holds that there is no access to the concept of freedom except through that of the moral law:

> [W]hereas freedom is indeed the *ratio essendi* of the moral law, the moral law is the *ratio cognoscendi* of freedom. For, had not the moral law *already* been distinctly thought in our reason, we should never consider ourselves justified in *assuming* such a thing as freedom (even though it is not self-contradictory). But were there no freedom, the moral law would *not be encountered* at all in ourselves. (Kant 1996a: 4n)

Were the deliberative standpoint not to involve an "encounter" with the moral law, it would require no presupposition of autonomy. When, however, we become conscious of being morally bound, we acknowledge "a determining ground" that cannot "be outweighed by any sensible conditions" and that is "quite independent of them." And this "leads directly to the concept of freedom" (29–30).

Kant makes his point with a pair of vivid examples. The first involves someone who claims to be subject to an irresistible lust. Kant's comments here are in a compatibilist vein: such a person could surely control his lust if he were threatened with hanging on a gallows "erected in front of the house where he finds this opportunity" (1996a: 30). That he can control his lust in this sense, however, is consistent with his behavior's being determined entirely by his currently strongest inclination or objectdependent desire. It just shows that in altered circumstances, some other object-dependent desire would have been stronger. And maybe he has some such desire, perhaps the desire for self-preservation, that would override, not just his lust, but also any other desire, including any principle-dependent desire that is necessary to motivate genuinely moral action.

Kant's second example is addressed to this very possibility. Here we are to imagine someone whose prince demands "on pain of the same immediate execution, that he give false testimony against an honorable man whom the prince would like to destroy under a plausible pretext." Whether this person would refuse to do such a thing, Kant writes, "he would perhaps not venture to assert." But whether he would or he wouldn't, he "must admit without hesitation that it would be possible for him."

He judges, therefore, that he can do something because he is aware that he ought to do it and cognizes freedom within him, which, without the moral law, would have remained unknown to him. (1996a: 30)

Once he acknowledges that he should refuse to comply with his prince's demand even on pain of execution, he cannot coherently think it impossible for him to refuse owing to an irresistible desire for selfpreservation. The point seems to follow from the nature of a deliberative (normative) practical judgment. Were he to suppose his desire for selfpreservation to be literally irresistible, he would be forced, in reasoning practically in light of that, to conclude that he should do something else after all, he can't give uphis life. But Kant evidently thinks that nobody really believes there is anything else he should do in this case other than refuse to betray an honorable man. When we're being honest with ourselves, we acknowledge that we shouldn't give in to a corrupt tyrant to destroy an honest person, perhaps even at the pain of our own death. And if we acknowledge that, then we are also forced to assume that that is something we can refuse to do.[^35]

Kant is here simply drawing out the logical consequences of what he takes to be already involved in accepting the bindingness of the moral law. The consciousness of the moral law is, he says, a "fact of reason" because one cannot reason it out from antecedent data of reason, for example, from consciousness of freedom (since this is not antecedently given to us) and because it instead forces itself upon us of itself as a synthetic *a priori* proposition. (1996a: 31)

Kant clearly believes that his readers will agree with his moral phenomenology if they will just be honest with themselves, and we can read the example as being offered in that spirit. We put ourselves into the shoes of the person in the example, simulate practical thought from that perspective, and agree that in those circumstances the thing to do is to refuse the corrupt tyrant's offer and not have an honest person's death on our hands. Do we think we would do that? Surely we hope so, but alas, we also know the results of the Milgram experiment. But we must accept that we could.

Obviously these reflections are impotent to establish that the moral law is binding, however, since they already presuppose that we accept that (although they might inspire a cynic who has sought to evade what he himself most deeply believes). But Kant is no longer attempting to give a positive argument that morality is not illusory. He is employing a strategy that Rawls calls "philosophy as defense," showing how we need not give upour acceptance of the moral law once we already have it. In a way, this strategy is like Strawson's in "Freedom and Resentment." Is the possibility that the will is not free (or autonomous) a threat to morality? Well, it might be if we had to establish autonomy as a premise before we could defensibly think we are morally bound. But we don't have to worry about that. We begin already accepting certain moral claims and ideas including, Kant thinks, the bindingness of the moral law. And once we have that, we must accept autonomy on pain of deliberative incoherence. Of course, if someone could establish that we lack the very condition that our being morally obligated presupposes, then we'd have a problem.

However, even if we don't need a philosophical argument to convince us that the moral law is supremely authoritative, we still have a philosophical interest in understanding why it is.[^36] I believe, as I begin to show in the next chapter, that the answer is to be found in the second-person standpoint. To conclude this chapter, however, let me note a way in which the second-person perspective is actually required to underwrite the use to which Kant puts the "fact of reason" in the second *Critique.*

Just after the passage we have been discussing, Kant presents what he calls the Fundamental Law of Pure Practical Reason (FPP): "So act that the maxim of your will could always hold at the same time as a principle in a giving of universal law" (1996a: 30). This is, in essentials, the same as the more formal versions of the CI from the *Groundwork*: FUL (Formula of Universal Law: "Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it become a universal law") and FLN (Formula of the Law of Nature: "Act as if the maxim of your action were to become by your will a universal law of nature") (1996b: 421). But why, we should ask, does Kant think that the fact of reason supports a formal principle like FPP? The reasoning in the Remark that follows

FPP appeals essentially to autonomy of the will: "The will is thought as independent of empirical conditions and hence, as a pure will, as determined by the mere form of law." Then Kant says, again, "Consciousness of this fundamental law may be called a fact of reason... because it forces itself upon us of itself as a synthetic *a priori* proposition" (1996a: 31).

But what exactly is the connection between the claim that since one should do what the moral law requires and refuse the prince's demand, one can so refuse, on the one hand, and either autonomy of the will as Kant understands it or FPP, on the other? The connection between autonomy and FPP seems clear enough. But what does the "fact of reason" example have to do with either autonomy or FPP? A Rossian deontological intuitionist could easily grant what Kant says about the example and generalize from it that whatever a person morally ought to do must be something she can do. But why should he conclude FPP from that? Couldn't he deny that any principle like FPP underlies the list of duties he accepts or that such a formal principle is required to explain why it would be wrong to give in to the prince? Couldn't he even deny the FPP?

If he agrees with Kant about the example and about 'ought' implies 'can', why should he be led from that to autonomy of the will? Deontological intuitionists deny autonomy, as we noted earlier, since they hold that actions (objects of volition) can be intrinsically right or wrong and that the law derives from that. Nothing in what Kant says about the example should lead them to abandon this position. And if Kant adds that we are directly conscious of the CI as a synthetic *a priori* principle, then it seems he is simply fighting deontological intuitionists on their own turf and just disagreeing about whether moral duties can be summed into a single principle. In any case, there seems no obvious route from the "fact of reason" to autonomy of the will or FPP.[^37]

### **The Fact of Reason: A Second-Personal Interpretation**

Now I believe that there actually is an argument for FPP and the CI that can be made from intuitive examples like the one Kant presents. However, such an argument would rely on the second-personal aspect of moral obligation: its conceptual tie to accountability. Recall, first, that the sense of 'can' that is in play in Kant's own discussion is simply that of an open deliberative alternative, that is, something such that one's abilities and opportunities with respect to it do not preclude intelligible consideration of whether to do it. That is why 'ought' implies 'can' in that sense is so obviously true. 'Ought' has the sense of a deliberation-concluding normative judgment: This, of the things I can do, is what I ought to do. But now note that the fact that someone can do something in this sense is entirely consistent with her not knowing that she ought to do it, with her not being able to know it, and with her lacking any formal process of practical reasoning (involving a principle like FPP) through which could she could determine that this is what she should do and determine herself to act accordingly. A Rossian intuitionist, for example, can hold that someone (call her "Citizen") ought to refuse the prince's demand even if she doesn't know she should do so, couldn't know she should, and had no process of reasoning, like FPP or the CI through which she could discover this or determine herself to do so. Even so, the Rossian can agree with Kant that, since Citizen ought to refuse the prince's demand, she can do so. But, again, that doesn't entail anything about the CI or autonomy.

It is common ground that Citizen is morally obligated to refuse the prince's demand, that it would be wrong for her not to do so, and that that is therefore what she should do and, consequently, what she can do. As I argued in Chapter 5, however, if this is what Citizen is morally obligated to do, then it is also what she is accountable or responsible for doing; it is what the moral community (and she as a member) has the authority to demand that she do. Now if we, as members of the moral community, accept second-personal norms that support these demands, and, on this basis, address this proposition to Citizen,[^38] we are not simply informing her of how things are "in the moral community," as an anthropologist might inform someone of mores he does not himself accept. We implicitly address the demands to Citizen and put them forward as authoritative, as, indeed, does Citizen herself when she acknowledges the moral obligation.

We relate to Citizen through "moral address" (Watson 1987: 263, 264). In so doing, moreover, we are subject to Watsonian "constraints of moral address," that is, conditions that must be satisfied for the addressing of demands, holding responsible, blaming, and so forth, to be intelligible in their own terms. (As I have alternatively been putting it, these are normative felicity conditions of the second-personal reason we attempt to address existing and, hence, of the success of our address.) Thus, although there is no conceptual pressure to hold that the mere existence of good and sufficient reasons for someone to do something entails that he knows or even can know this (would that it were so!), it does seem to be a conceptual requirement of blaming and holding Citizen responsible for not refusing the prince's demand (if she fails to) that we presuppose that she must have been in a position to know that she should have refused and that she could have determined herself to refuse by the relevant reasons.

When we hold people responsible, we imply that they had it within them to act as they should, not just in the sense that the alternatives were open to them or that they weren't physically prevented, but that there was a process of reasoning they could have engaged in by which they could have held themselves responsible and determined themselves to act as they should have. We imply that they could have decided to do it by, in Bernard Williams's words, a "sound deliberative route" (1981a). (Recall that Williams himself [1995] argues that blame presupposes this (Williams thinks illicitly).) But what reasoning process can we assume that those subject to moral obligations must have available to them? Kant's idea is that it would have to be a procedure that is itself tied to what it is that makes us subject to moral obligation in the first place, our being rational wills, and therefore that it must be tied somehow to the "form" of the will. The CI and the FPP are Kant's proposals for the requisite reasoning process, in effect, *the form that moral reasoning would have to take if it is to lead us to conclusions that we can intelligibly be held responsible for reaching.* And autonomy of the will follows as a corollary. But my point is that it takes a focus on the second-personal aspect of moral obligation to appreciate the connection between thinking that Citizen is morally obligated (responsible for refusing) and thinking that there must be a process of reasoning (the CI or FPP) through which she could have determined her obligation and determined herself to refuse. A second-personal interpretation of this Kantian claim is that (something like) CI reasoning is part of second-personal competence.

We get to substantially the same conclusion if we think through the role of second-personal competence in holding one another accountable.

When we hold each other responsible for complying with moral obligations as fellow members of the moral community, we imply that we each can also hold ourselves responsible. But this requires us to regiment moral demands by what anyone could accept as a sensible demand of everyone as equal members of a community of mutually accountable equals, and thereby demand of herself. In Chapter 12, I argue that the CI, especially in the Realm of Ends formulation (FRE), is an interpretation of this intuitive idea, that is, CI is a formulation of the reasoning process that constitutes the second-personal competence we presuppose when we hold one another responsible for complying with moral demands.

What is fundamental in this way of thinking is the second-personal authority that I have been claiming is an essential aspect of the dignity of persons: the (equal) authority that persons have, as such, to make claims on and demands of one another at all. Autonomy of the will and the necessity of a formal deliberative process derive from this more fundamental idea—as necessary conditions for the possibility of second-personal authority and as necessary to mediate second-personal relations—rather than vice versa. There can be second-personal authority *only-if* there is second-personal competence. And persons can be assumed to have second-personal competence *only-if* we can assume autonomy and some form of moral reasoning like the CI. People can sensibly be held accountable for complying with norms *only-if* they can themselves accept and determine themselves by them (Pufendorf 's Point). But that can be guaranteed to be so *only-if* what makes the demand-warranting norms valid is their issuing from a process that people can, at least in principle, go through in their own reasoning and thereby make the relevant demands of themselves.

If, however, the dignity of persons, conceived as equal second-personal authority, is the fundamental moral notion, what commits us to that idea? Why should we accept that it is not a chimerical idea itself? We now have almost all the materials we need to answer that question.

[^1]: Alternatively, if it is held to be a conceptual thesis that moral obligations provide overriding reasons, I believe it is likewise impossible to establish that we actually have any moral obligations.
[^2]: And that is not, moreover, simply the capacity to "set ends." Even if this also has no obvious analogue in, say, reasoning about what to believe, it is clearly not what Kant means by autonomy of the will.
[^3]: For discussion of this point, see Chapter 7.
[^4]: As I noted in Chapter 7, it is consistent with *A*'s being instrumental in the relevant sense that *p* is the state of *A*'s being done.

[^5]: It takes some care to show that presuppositions of the practical standpoint do not rule this picture out. The biggest challenge is to show that nothing in the way reasongrounding norms of conduct must figure in practical conduct does so. It is an important insight of Kant's that agents act for normative reasons, as they see them, and that this involves the implicit acceptance of universal norms of conduct as applying necessarily to any rational agent. In Chapter 7, I argued that norm acceptance is state-of-a-subjectregarding rather than state-of-the-world-regarding. Moreover, it is an important, further consequence of the "wrong kind of reason" problem that norms of conduct differ conceptually from norms for desire. But although that is true, nothing in the terms of intelligible deliberation rules out the possibility that all reasons for action might nonetheless derive from reasons for desire, so that all reasons for action are instrumental. A second issue, again, concerns the necessity of rational norms and its relation to desire. I argue that a Moorean (consequentialist intuitionist) version can address this worry.

[^6]: I mean, of course, a "non-second-personal first-person standpoint." As I've noted before, second-person standpoints are always versions of first-person standpoints.
[^7]: Although it plays no obvious foundational role, we should note that there are many places in Kant's writings where the second-personal character of the moral law is implicit. I noted already in Chapter 6 passages in which Kant mentions second-personal aspects of dignity, respect, and self-conceit (Kant 1996d: 434–435, 462). In addition, Kant has remarkable discussions of conscience as replicating a judicial scene, with prosecutor and so forth (e.g., 1996a: 98–100; 1996d: 400–401, 437–440). More foundationally, Kant holds that "I can recognize that I am under obligation to others only insofar as I at the same time put myself under obligation" (1996d: 417–418). (I am indebted to Robert Johnson for reminding me of this passage.) And from the *Critique of Pure Reason:* "[E]veryone also regards the moral law as commands, which however they could not be if they did not connect appropriate consequences with their rule *a priori,* and thus carry with them promises and threat." (1998: A811–812, B839–840). (I am grateful to Jacob Ross for pointing me to this passage.) For example, as David Velleman has pointed out, Kant says in the Preface to the *Groundwork* that "the command 'thou shalt not lie' " holds for all rational beings (Kant 1996b: 389; Velleman 2005: 116–121).

[^8]: This is Allen Wood's translation of this passage, which seems superior to Mary Gregor's.
[^9]: On "direction of fit," see Anscombe 1957; Platts 1979; Smith 1994.
[^10]: See Donald Davidson's classic paper (1980).
[^11]: This doctrine should be interpreted in a way that allows for the possibility of weakness of will. One way of doing so is to take Kant to hold that nothing counts as a genuine action unless the agent does it for some reason, hence that she must see her action as recommended *pro tanto* by some rational norm. It is consistent with this that the agent nonetheless simultaneously believes (accepts) that her act is contrary to what she has most reason to do, all things considered, hence contrary to what valid rational norms would most recommend. On "normative acceptance," see Chapter 7.

[^12]: Kant here seems to ignore the possibility that normative reasons might not be conditional on desire, but still dependent on features of the object of desire, as these might be given in a Moorean intuition that some possible state of the world is intrinsically good, that is worthy of desire.
[^13]: For the interaction between this distinction and Nagel's distinction between motivated and unmotivated desires, see Chapter 7, note 2. Note also that autonomy requires not only that the will is governed by its own principles (laws), which apply to it independently of a desire for any state (i.e., are not "empirical" in the sense laid out in the last paragraph), but also that it is governed by norms that apply to it independently of the (apparent) value (e.g., desirability) of any outcome or state. On this point, see below.

[^14]: This condition is necessary, but not sufficient, for autonomy. There is one further condition, which is described in the paragraph after the next.
[^15]: It is important to see that autonomy, as Kant defines it, has both a normative and a metaphysical component. The normative component is the claim that there are valid (reason-grounding) norms that apply to the rational will as such, independently of any property of the objects of volition. And the nonnormative, metaphysical component is that the will can act on this law.
[^16]: Rawls 1980 and Korsgaard 1996e are helpful here.

[^17]: Of course, Kant cannot simply assume that norms of practical reason involve autonomy (and so are "laws of freedom" in that sense), without begging the question.
[^18]: The emphasis here must be on "alien" causes. I can't see that the argument, at this point anyway, requires the presupposition that one's rational thinking is not itself a causal process. I set aside the question of whether Kant believed that a deliberating agent must assume incompatibilist freedom as irrelevant to our concerns.
[^19]: Of course, these might include facts about myself, my expected mood, how I would expect to enjoy the film, and so on, that I take as reasons for going, and for wanting to go. But these are still facts about the objects of my desire most properly understood, not the fact of my desire itself.

[^20]: Compare Kant's remark in *Reflexionen* 6660: "The expression 'it is good' expresses a relation to desire as the expression 'it is true' a relation to belief" (Kant 1900– ). I am indebted here to Timothy Rosenkoetter, "A Semantic Approach to Kant's Practical Philosophy," presented at the APA Central Division 2003 meetings in Cleveland, Ohio. The translation of the above passage is Rosenkoetter's.
[^21]: On reflection, the idea that a state simply ought to be cannot be made fully coherent. I develop this point at greater length in Darwall 2003b. I argue that Moore's conception should be rejected, mainly because it is inconsistent with the autonomy of the will we can appreciate from the second-person standpoint. For a sympathetic discussion of the idea that deliberation from the practical standpoint is best interpreted in Moorean terms, see Regan 2003a.

[^22]: Compare also Kant: "Theoretical knowledge may be defined as knowledge of what *is,* practical knowledge as the representation of what *ought to be*" (Kant 1998: A633). This is Moore's approach in *Principia Ethica,* although he doesn't identify judgments of what states have intrinsic value ("ought to exist for what for its own sake") with desires for those states. Moore does, however, draw the consequence that action on such a view is essentially instrumental and that normative reasons for action derive entirely from the intrinsic value of states.
[^23]: So long, that is, as we evaluate states independently of their relation to valid norms of action.
[^24]: As, indeed, Moore later did (1966).

[^25]: Obviously, I am abstracting from epistemological issues. I assume this model can be modified to take account of probabilistic information, uncertainty, and so on.
[^26]: Korsgaard gives a streamlined version of her interpretation of Kant's argument for FH in Korsgaard 1996e: 122.
[^27]: Korsgaard favors the latter formulation in 1996f (originally published in 1983) and the former in more recent formulations, for example, 1996e.
[^28]: See also Parfit 1997.
[^29]: "Substantive realism" is Korsgaard's term in Korsgaard 1996e.

[^30]: Actually, even if we were to assume the first premise in the sense that entails autonomy, that is. that a condition or source of value is being willed rationally (in accord with formal laws), it is very unclear how anything like FH would follow as a conclusion. The basic problem, as various commentators have pointed out, is that it is not obvious why a condition or source of value must itself have value in order for anything else to derive value from it. Samuel Kerstein (2001) points out that there would be no less reason to say that rational agency is the source of disvalue (if, that is, something's being objectively bad is thought to depend on its being rationally rejected as an end), but no one would think to conclude that rational agency is therefore disvaluable.

[^31]: For an excellent discussion of this argument to which I am indebted, see Regan 2003b. David Sussman (2003) argues that Regan's arguments don't work as criticisms of Kant, although they might as criticisms of Wood's and Korsgaard's interpretation of the regress argument. Sussman argues, plausibly, that Regan, Wood, and Korsgaard all conflate objective value with practical necessity, and that Kant's arguments depend on the way in which, when a rational agent commits herself to an end, she is then under a practical necessity to take the necessary means. As he points out, this follows a line that Korsgaard herself pursues in Korsgaard 1997. I criticize this line in Darwall 2001. One problem is that, so far as instrumental reason is concerned, the agent is under a rational necessity only to take the necessary means or to give upthe end. So instrumental reason is insufficient, by itself, to provide a source of reasons for acting.

[^32]: The relevant value might be at least partly instrumental.
[^33]: Wood makes an argument that is relevant here. See Wood 1999: 130. The kind of authority under discussion here differs from other forms of valuing in play in the preceding paragraphs.

[^34]: In Korsgaard 1996e, Korsgaard puts forward a different argument for the Formula of Humanity that is rooted in the self-reflective character of the deliberative standpoint. Korsgaard notes that agency requires some degree of self-reflection, that the agent must see himself as "something over and above all [his] desires" who "*chooses* which desire to act on" (100). This commits the agent to a "practical identity," a normative conception of himself, which he draws on in deliberation. She argues that there is one practical identity I cannot question as a deliberating rational agent, namely, my identity as a deliberating rational agent. I am committed from within the deliberative standpoint to my "identity simply as *a human being,* a reflective animal who needs reasons to act and to live" (121). This means, she argues, that I must treat my own humanity or rational agency as somehow a source of normative reasons for me. To vindicate the bindingness of the moral law, however, we need to be able to conclude that I am committed to treating rational agency in others as normative for me also. Korsgaard's argument from here is complex, drawing primarily on Wittgensteinian themes about the impossibility of a private language (131– 136). The basic idea is that the claim that rational nature is a source of *agent-relative* reasons—that is, that the agent's rational nature gives reasons distinctively to him—treats these reasons as the kind of essentially private phenomenon that Ludwig Wittgenstein showed to be incoherent. The moral of the private language argument for practical philosophy, Korsgaard argues, is that all reasons must be "public and shareable" (136). Consequently, whatever reasons an agent's normative identity as rational gives him must be public and shareable too. Therefore, the rational nature of others is no less normative for him than is his own.

<br>The problem with this strategy is that any lesson that can be drawn from Wittgenstein's private language argument is quite general and applies in theoretical reasoning no less than in practical reasoning. Moreover, theoretical inquiry is no less self-reflexive than is practical deliberation. A rational believer, like a rational agent, must be able to see herself as "something over and above" her inclinations (in this case, to beliefs as these are given in experience). And, as we have seen, she must also see her reasoning as free of determination by alien causes and guided by rational norms. Finally, in inquiry we are guided by a rational conception of ourselves as theoretical reasoners no less than we are by a practical identity in deliberation. We must give ourselves a kind of authority in our own reasoning about what to believe no less than we must in deliberation. It follows that these considerations, taken by themselves, are insufficient to establish autonomy or anything that is equivalent to it, since they are consistent with the sort of heteronomy that characterizes theoretical reasoning. For example, they are consistent with the Moorean realism of the naïve deliberative standpoint. Of course, Korsgaard would reject realism of this form, as would I. But the point is that nothing in the argument from practical identity or the impossibility of a private language itself rules Moorean realism out. So the argument cannot establish autonomy or the moral law.

[^35]: Recall, at this point, Foot's point (1972) that suitably qualified ought claims, like those of etiquette, are not necessarily practically normative; they do not entail supremely authoritative, or even necessarily any genuinely normative, reasons for acting. There is no incoherence in thinking that one is utterly incapable of doing what etiquette requires or recommends. Even apart from psychic obstacles, there may be physical bars that make it impossible to set a proper table. One may simply lack enough forks. Similarly, there may be ways of attempting, at least, to cancel the normative force that moral oughts and obligations typically purport to have and qualify them in the way that those of etiquette already seem to be. Inverted commas or a suitable inflection may enable one to express the thought that although refusing the prince's demand is what one should do, "you know, morally speaking," one is unable to comply. But Kant's point is that it is simply deliberatively incoherent to think that the prince's offer is irresistible in the sense of being literally impossible to refuse *if* one also thinks one should refuse it as a deliberative thought, that is, as a conclusion of a chain of practical reasoning. After all, if it is impossible, then it is nothing you can coherently consider doing and so you must conclude that what you should do is something else. For a very helpful discussion of 'ought' implies 'can' in this vein, see Vranas unpublished. Vranas argues that it 'ought implies can' is conceptually necessary, where 'can' has the sense of 'has the ability and the opportunity'.

[^36]: Or, if one supposes it to be a conceptual truth that the moral law is supremely authoritative, we have an interest in understanding what makes something we take to be a moral law one in fact. The conceptual truth would only be that if anything is a moral law, then it is supremely authoritative.
[^37]: Of course, if the "fact of reason" itself includes awareness of the CI, then there is no stepto take.
[^38]: Or, indeed, if Citizen addresses it to herself.
