# PART III

## 7. The Psychology of the Second Person

We respect persons when we give them standing in our relations with them and recognize their second-personal dignity. But what psychic mechanisms are involved in respect and the second-person standpoint? How is it possible for a capacity that is sensitive, in principle, to claims of free and rational agents as such to be realized in human psychology, naturalistically conceived? Whether there is such a thing as dignity and what it takes to have that status are not, of course, matters of empirical psychology. The thesis of morality as equal accountability is moralphilosophical, not psychological. Still, rival consequentialist moral theories can be lent an air of apparent empirical support and realism by the familiar Humean moral psychology with which they are often associated and hence an apparent default plausibility that Kantian theories rarely seem to enjoy. There is, for some, a lingering sense that any moral theory claiming *a priori* foundations and faculties cannot possibly apply to human beings as we actually are.

This chapter discusses aspects of human psychology that are relevant to morality as equal accountability and to the second-person stance more generally. We have already seen (in Chapters 4 and 5) how familiar reactive attitudes have an implicitly second-personal structure that fits them to practices of mutual accountability. In this chapter, we consider how these interact with other psychic mechanisms that also play crucial supporting roles, most notably, empathy and what Gibbard calls our "normative psychology," namely, the distinctive human capacities concerned with accepting and regulating behavior and feeling by norms (1990: 55–82).

Two caveats are necessary at the outset. First, I should stress again that

nothing I say in this chapter is intended to provide direct support for morality as equal accountability or for the existence of second-personal reasons. Any arguments for these ideas must be normative and philosophical.1 Nonetheless, to the extent that human behavior can be shown to involve capacities in which second-personal moral notions are psychically realized, so also can these ideas be seen to fit with our psychology, or at least not to be in conflict with it.

Second, although I draw on a steadily increasing literature in experimental psychology, some of my psychological hypotheses are abstract and speculative. To some extent, this is unavoidable. And it is worth noting that the Humean framework similarly employs a more abstract conception of desire than any that can be found in common sense or experimental psychology. In fact, the Humean theory's notion of desire is sufficiently abstract that the phenomena I point to here are likely consistent with the basic "law" of the Humean theory of motivation—which states that all intentional action results from appropriately paired desires and beliefs (Davidson 1980; Smith 1994). The fact remains that the mechanisms I discuss are implicated in desires that are, in Rawls's helpful terms, "principle-dependent" rather than "object-dependent."2 Here there will be two crucial points. First, sometimes, perhaps frequently, the desires that help to explain our intentional behavior are among those we have because we accept certain norms of action. And second, some of the

<sup>1</sup> For these, see Chapters 10–12.

<sup>2</sup> On the basic Humean idea, see Smith 1987 and 1994. For Rawls's distinction, see Rawls 2000: 45–48, 148–152. See also Freeman 1991. For further discussion of these points, see Chapters 9, 10, and 11.

Rawls's distinction is similar to, but also importantly different from, Nagel's distinction between "motivated" and "unmotivated" desires (Nagel 1970: 29–30, 38). For Nagel, a desire is motivated if it is based on a reason, if, that is, there is something that is the agent's reason for so desiring. Unmotivated desires are those one brutely has, like the desire for a cool drink, as we say, "for no reason." However, a desire could be motivated but still be object-dependent, namely, if the agent's reasons are drawn from properties of the desire's object or if the agent desires that thing because she think it is intrinsically good. Such desires would be "object-dependent" and "heteronomous" in Kant's sense, since they would come not just from the will's being a "law to itself independently of any property of the objects of volition." (See Kant 1996b: 440 and Chapters 9 through 11 of this book.) "Principle-dependent desires," by contrast, derive from norms of action to which one is subject simply as a rational will and independently of the properties, hence independently of any value of any object of volition, that is, of any representable state of affairs or possible state of the world.

norms we evidently accept essentially involve the idea of second-personal authority.

Finally, we should keep in mind a point I made at the end of Chapter 5, namely, that the familiar forms of moral reasoning that are involved in such principles as the Golden Rule and the Categorical Imperative have an intuitive second-personal interpretation. The thought that people ought not to act in ways that fall short of their expectations or implicit demands of others reveals itself in our psychology in all sorts of ways, from the reactive attitudes to more principled moral reasoning of the kind that psychologists of moral development like Kohlberg (1981) have studied. Any denial that these forms of reasoning and the feelings that draw upon them are deep and pervasive aspects of human psychology would seem to be, to quote Bishop Butler, "too glaring a falsity to need being confuted" (1983: I.8).3

### **Desire and Norm**

We can begin by considering the respective motivational roles played by desire, as philosophers normally understand it, and norm acceptance, as Gibbard describes it. I claim, again, that second-personal competence essentially includes the capacity to be guided by norms, especially by second-personal norms that concern the authority to claim and demand. Ultimately I argue that there is yet a further essential element: the ability critically to evaluate second-personal norms one accepts, and competing alternatives, from the standpoint of one mutually accountable person among others and to be guided by those one would endorse from that standpoint.4 One way of viewing the argument of this book is as an attempt to show that this is but a more developed version of what is implicit in any second-personal thinking, for example, in reactive attitudes.

Gibbard introduces the idea of norm acceptance through a discussion of cases of weak will. Suppose, for example, that you can't get yourself to stop eating nuts at a party (1990: 56).5 On the one hand, you desire

<sup>3</sup> The context is Butler's claim that conscience is natural to human beings.

<sup>4</sup> As Gibbard would understand it, this would be a capacity to be guided by relevant higher-order norms. See Gibbard on the "authority" of normative judgments (1990: 177– 183).

<sup>5</sup> This case has the same structure as the one Plato discusses in the *Republic* of the person who restrains thirst by seeing that there are better reasons not to drink (437d– 439d).

to keep eating them. On the other, you think you shouldn't. It doesn't matter for present purposes why. The reasons might relate to health, avoiding boorishness, not taking more than one's share, or whatever. The point is that some conflict exists between your desire for nuts and your normative conviction regarding what there is most reason for you to do. We know, of course, that frequently the nuts win out. But the point is that they don't always and that even when they do, there is usually some conflict. At least some motivation seems to come from accepting that there are weightier reasons to stop eating.6

This is not sufficient to establish that the motivation does not derive from further independent desires, of course. Perhaps it comes in this case from the desire to be healthy or from the desire not to be or to seem a boor. However, there are many reasons for thinking that this cannot always be so in general, that our accepting norms and normative reasons must exert some influence on our behavior that cannot be reduced to that of independently existing desires that are not themselves principledependent.7

One reason is that beliefs and desires can themselves explain behavior as intentional only on the hypothesis that we are usually instrumentally rational, and this will be so only if norms of instrumental rationality play a regulating role (Korsgaard 1986). Lewis Carroll (1895) famously made the analogous point about inference as it applies to belief. Without guidance by some norm of inference, a set of beliefs or believed premises is impotent to yield conclusions. (Of course, beliefs might simply cause further beliefs in some nonrational way, but this wouldn't explain the transition of thought as rational.) If, for example, someone believes *p* and if *p,* then *q,* she cannot conclude *q* unless she follows a norm of inference, *modus ponens,* that takes her from (her beliefs that) *p* and if *p,* then *q,* to (a belief that) *q.* Trying to add a further *modus ponens*-like belief—(if *p* and if *p,* then *q,* then *q*)—will not help, since it will still take following *modus ponens* to get rationally even from these augmented beliefs to a

<sup>6</sup> For an argument that motivation always comes from reasons to which desires and normative judgments respond, and never from the psychic states of responding to them, see Dancy 2000.

<sup>7</sup> There are too many issues to enter into fully here. For relevant discussion, see, in addition to Dancy 2000, Darwall 1983, Nagel 1970, and Smith 1994.

belief that *q.* The rational formation of new beliefs through inference cannot be fully explained by belief, therefore; it also requires regulation by a norm of inference.

The situation is exactly analogous with instrumental reasoning from ends to necessary means.8 To reason to a conclusion to take the necessary means to an end, it is required, not just that one have the end and believe some means to be necessary to achieve it, but also that one be regulated by a norm of practical inference that takes one from this desire and belief to the practical conclusion to take the necessary means.9 And the only way the end and belief can rationally give rise to a desire to take the means is via a norm of instrumental reasoning that is analogous to *modus ponens.* A further desire to take the necessary means to one's ends will be impotent in itself, for the very same reason that Lewis Carroll pointed to in the theoretical case.

Regulation by norms of these theoretical and practical kinds is thus necessary to explain rational behavior, even in the terms of Humean desire-belief psychology. As important as this phenomenon is, however, it doesn't yet fully capture the way in which norm acceptance is involved when an acceptance that one should or has reason to do something tends to motivate doing it, and such tendency, as in Gibbard's nuts example, conflicts with occurrent desires. The reason is that this necessarily includes accepting not just norms of inference but also norms that can supply premises in practical reasoning, that is, substantive normative reasons for acting. *Modus ponens* and the norm of instrumental reason, as well as such associated norms of coherent theoretical and practical reasoning as the law of non-contradiction and formal decision theory, are best interpreted as norms of "relative rationality" (Darwall 1983: 14–16, 44–49, 66–67; also Darwall 2001). If one has good reason not to believe *p* and if *p,* then *q,* then the fact that one believes *p* and if *p,* then *q* cannot (by *modus ponens*) give one any reason to believe *q.* Rather *modus ponens* transfers whatever rational support there is for the first two beliefs to the third. Believing *q* is rational "relative to" there being reason to believe both *p* and if *p,* then *q,* respectively.

<sup>8</sup> The point is especially well made in Broome 1999. See also Blackburn 1995 and Railton 1997: 76–78.

<sup>9</sup> At this point, I am abstracting from the difference between having something as end, which presumably involves intention, and desiring it, which need not, since it doesn't matter for present purposes.

Here again, the situation is exactly analogous in instrumental reasoning. If one has no reason to have an end (and/or no reason to believe that some means is necessary to achieving it), then the mere facts that one has the relevant end and belief can give one no reason whatsoever to take the means. The most that instrumental rationality can require is that one either take the means or give up either the end or the belief about the means' indispensability. The practical analogue of *modus ponens* transfers rational support from the end and the belief to the means. Taking the means is rational relative to there being reason to have the end and to believe that the relevant means is indispensable.10

Our beliefs, desires, and intentions must be more than merely coherent to be supported by reasons. It follows that when we sincerely judge that there is reason to do something or that we ought to do it, we must accept substantive normative claims that go beyond any that follow from norms of coherent belief, desire, and action. And there is good reason to think, moreover, that the influence of accepting such normative judgments, like that of accepting norms of practical inference, cannot be reduced to the influence of independently existing desires.

Particularists like Dancy may insist at this point that the normative reasons we accept frequently resist formulation in universal norms, whereas universalists may hold that if I judge, say, that I should forego the nuts because that is for my good, this commits me to a universal norm of prudence. But these differences don't matter for our purposes. Whether motivational influence comes from acceptance of particular or universal normative claims, what matters is its irreducibility to independently existing desires.11 I therefore use "normative acceptance" to refer to the acceptance of either.12

<sup>10</sup> The intuitive idea is that what rationality rules out here are incoherent combinations of attitudes. It does not rule in any particular attitude or action on the condition that one has certain others. On this point, see Broome 1999; Dancy 2000; Darwall 1983, 2001; Greenspan 1975; and Hare 1971.

<sup>11</sup> Dancy, again, holds that, strictly speaking, any motivational influence must come from normative reasons themselves, not from their acceptance or from any desires that might respond to them. If 'motivation' refers to agents' reasons, that is, to (believed) facts or features of the situation that the agent counted in favor of acting, this seems surely correct. However, we also frequently use 'motivation' to refer to a subjective motivational state. When, for example, we say that someone was motivated by fear, we do not mean that fear was his reason. What the agent had in view that counted in favor of his action was not the fact of his fear, but scary facts his fear "lit up" for him.

<sup>12</sup> For a discussion of the psychic state of norm acceptance, see Gibbard 1990: 55–82.

Presently, I point to what I think are important psychic differences between desire and normative acceptance. First, however, we need to note an important logical difference. Desire, as conceived within the Humean framework, takes propositions or possible states of affairs as objects.13 Desire and belief are defined by their differing "directions of fit" with respect to a common propositional content or possible state of the world (Anscombe 1957; Platts 1979: 256–257; Smith 1994: 111–119). A belief that *p* represents the world as being such that *p,* and if the world is not such that *p,* the belief is mistaken and should be changed. Beliefs are thus said to have the "mind-to-world" direction of fit; they seek to fit the mind to the world. Desires work the other way around, in a "world-tomind" direction. A desire represents a possible state of affairs that the world should contain (viewed, as it were, from the desire's perspective).

So conceived, desires are *state-of-the-world-regarding* in their nature. To have a desire is to be disposed to bring some state of the world about. It is, we might say, to be *teleologically* disposed. Even when the desired state includes one's performing a specific action as an essential part, even when performing the action comprises the state in its entirety, the motivational influence of the desire is still entirely teleological. One is moved to perform the action as an essential (or the sole) constituent of the state.

Normative acceptance, however, has a different logical structure.14 What practical norms and normative reasons for action call for is action pure and simple or, perhaps, a choice or intention to perform an action. Similarly, norms for belief recommend this or that belief; norms for feeling recommend this or that feeling; and so on. Call anything that can be regulated by a norm an "attitude."15 And call any being whose attitudes can be normatively regulated, and thus to whom norms can apply, a "subject." Attitudes are states of subjects that subjects can have for reasons, that is, where not only is there some non-rationalizing, say causal, explanation (explaining reason) of their having the attitude, but there is also something that is *the subject's reason* for having it, namely, some

See also Hart's discussion of taking an "internal" perspective on rules or law (Hart 1961: 55–57).

<sup>13</sup> The Humean view, in this context, is not necessarily the same as Hume's. For an interpretation of Hume along these lines, however, see Bricke 1996.

<sup>14</sup> For some similar claims, see Scheffler 2004: 231.

<sup>15</sup> For present purposes, we can identify doing *A* with the intention or choice to do *A.*

consideration or considerations the subject herself takes as a normative reason or reasons and acts on.

So whereas desires are state-of-the-world-regarding, normative acceptance is *attitude-of-a-subject-regarding;* and practical norms are intentionor action-regarding.16 Normative acceptance thus motivates intention and action directly, not out of a desire for some state.17 Perhaps we should say that it motivates "deontologically." Even when the norm is teleological, like "Bring it about that *p,*" normative acceptance does not motivate teleologically. It can only motivate one to act in conformance with applicable norms or normative reasons, even when these dictate the very same acts one would be moved to by a desire that *p.* And this logical difference gives rise to a psychic difference: unlike the acceptance of a norm recommending that one bring *p* about, a desire that *p* can show itself in disappointment that *p* did not occur, whether or not one was in a position to realize it.

The psychic difference between desire and norm acceptance also reveals itself in our experience in various other ways. One is in the phenomenon of *regret.* Failing to satisfy a desire can give rise to regret only if one thinks there was some reason to have done something to have satisfied the desire.18 The most familiar experience is regretting doing something one thinks one shouldn't have done, all things considered—continuing to eat the nuts, for example. But it is also possible to experience regret for things one thinks there was only some reason not to do, but overbalancing reason to do. In these cases, we are likely to say we regret "having" to do what we did rather than that we simply regret doing it, since the latter would imply regret, all things considered. The important

<sup>16</sup> Since states of affairs do not themselves admit of normative regulation, there can be no (unreduced) normative reasons for states—no brute ought-to-be's. (I argue for this claim at greater length in Darwall 2003b. Roughly, when we say that there is reason for something to obtain, all we can defensibly mean is that there is reason for having some attitude toward that state.)

<sup>17</sup> Of course, desires can be normatively regulated also—the desirable is what there is reason or we ought to desire. But reasons for acting cannot be reduced to reasons for desiring (although Humeans and non-Humeans alike can accept the principle of instrumental reason—that there is reason to do what will bring about desirable states of the world). For a discussion of this point, and of a fundamental disagreement between Sidgwick and Moore about whether the basic concept of ethics is ought (normative reason) or intrinsic value, see Darwall unpublished.

<sup>18</sup> More precisely, my remarks are meant to apply the form of regret that philosophers call "agent-regret." See, for example, Williams 1973: 170–205 and 1981b: 31, 74–75.

point is that failing to act on a desire can move us to regret only to the extent that it engages what we take to be normative reasons for acting.

An additional, second dissimilarity involving regret follows in the wake of desire's and normative acceptance's different logical structures. Both regret and unsatisfied desire are "con attitudes," broadly speaking, but whereas regret is against or "con" some action (or omission), unsatisfied desire is "con" some state. Thus, consider the case where the object of regret is the omission of an action whose performance was an essential constituent of a state you intrinsically desired. Suppose you think that you should have done *A* and you desire (or wish) that you had done *A.* Even in this case, regret at not having done *A* is different from feeling displeased that your doing of *A* didn't take place. The first naturally tends to give rise to dissatisfaction with yourself (as an agent). Displeasure that the state of affairs of your doing *A* did not obtain, however, can occasion dissatisfaction with yourself only if you took it you had some reason to do *A* (even if only because you thought your desiring to do *A* gave you such a reason).

Third, whereas accepting a norm regulating an attitude typically involves some tendency to acquire the relevant attitude in the conditions specified by the norm (Gibbard 1990: 55–82), a desire that one have that attitude does not itself involve a tendency to acquire the relevant state (at least, not directly). Thus, a desire that I believe something cannot itself give rise to the relevant belief, although it can motivate me to look for reasons that would support the belief, on the basis of which I might then acquire it. Desire is a normatively regulable attitude with its own distinctive (right kind of) normative reasons. In desiring that I believe something, it will seem to me that my having the belief would be desirable, that there are reasons for me to desire the state of the world in which I have that belief and reasons therefore to bring that state of the world about. But these are not reasons of the right kind to make the belief credible, nor is it possible by accepting them to form the belief. I can only form the desire that I have the belief. This is another reflection of the "wrong kind of reasons" problem that noted in Chapter 1. Were I, however, to believe that there are epistemic reasons for the belief, then I would accept that this is something I should believe. And it is possible to form a belief on these grounds (even when one can't say more specifically what the reasons are).19 Similarly for practical norm acceptance:

<sup>19</sup> The significance of this point for practical reason is somewhat masked by the fact that the desire that one do *A* does seem to give rise to one's doing *A*. However, I believe that the reason why this seems to be so is that we accept as an obvious norm of practical reason that we should do what brings about desirable or valuable states, and what seems to us to be true when we have a desire to do *A*, is that doing *A* would be good or valuable. Even here, I think, the desire gives rise to an action (that is, something done for some [apparent] normative reason) only thanks to this additional normative acceptance (or, at least, apparent normative acceptance).

thinking there is some reason to do something (even when one is unsure what the specific reasons are) involves some tendency so to act or intend. Attitudes that can be regulated by norms, again, are precisely those mental states that subjects can form for reasons—their reasons—that is, considerations they take as normative reasons to have the relevant attitude.20

We should not, however, draw too bright a line between desire and normative acceptance. Desires, again, are among the attitudes that can be normatively regulated. And to play the right role in motivating intentional action (even on the Humean picture) desires can hardly be just brute urges.21 They must be more like what Scanlon calls favorable "directed attention." When someone desires *P* in the "directed attention sense," "the thought of *P* keeps occurring to him or her in a favorable light... the person's attention is directed insistently toward considerations that present themselves as counting in favor of *P*" (Scanlon 1998: 37). But this just means, and Scanlon takes it to mean, that when one desires *P* it seems to one as if there are (normative) reasons to desire *P* and hence, owing to the principle of instrumental reason, to bring *P* about.22

Even though this brings desire within the scope of the normative, there is a remaining important difference with normative acceptance, namely, that desires involve seeming normative reasons, whether or not we accept, on reflection, that the reasons actually exist. In the nuts example, your desire to keep eating the nuts conflicts with your acceptance that you have better reasons to stop. You could accept that, of course, and still think there is some reason to keep eating, other things being equal. But to desire to keep eating, you don't have to accept even that *pro tanto* normative judgment. It is enough for desire, even in the directed attention

<sup>20</sup> Rabinowicz and Ronnøw-Rasmussen (2004) argue that attitudes implicitly contain the distinctive attitude-relevant reasons as part of their content and that appreciating this phenomenon is the solution to the "wrong kind of reasons" problem.

<sup>21</sup> This thesis is defended in Quinn 1991.

<sup>22</sup> Also in this same vein are: Bond 1983; Dancy 2000; Darwall 1983; Hampton 1998; Pettit and Smith 1990; and Quinn 1991.

sense, that eating the nuts seem good in some way, that there appears to be some reason to do so. That can be so even if you reject that there is any reason to keep eating. This kind of case is perhaps clearer in sensory experience. Once you are familiar with the illusion, the fact that a stick looks bent in water may not give you any reason to think that it is really bent. The illusory character of the experience doesn't outweigh a still existing reason; it defeats what would otherwise be a reason. And the same thing can happen with desire. The very things that seem attractive to you about eating the nuts might be features or considerations that you reject as any reasons at all, even as they continue to seem attractive.

A related phenomenon can happen with normative acceptance itself when, in Gibbard's words, we are "in the grip of a norm" (1990: 60). Gibbard discusses the phenomenon in connection with Milgram's famous experiments about obedience, which occupy us for different reasons presently. Subjects in the Milgram experiments were told by an authority figure to administer shocks to another subject to test how people learn. The "teacher" was told to respond to "learner"'s mistakes with shocks of increasing severity, beginning at 15 volts and continuing up to 450 volts. In fact, no shocks were actually given, and the learners were really confederates. But this was not, of course, what the subjects believed. And distressingly, a substantial majority of the subjects in the initial setup (approximately two-thirds) administered all the shocks they were ordered to, up to and including 450 volts, with the highest several levels being labeled, "Danger: Severe Shock." Many, however, were obviously upset, conflicted, and obeyed at the higher levels only under protest.23

We naturally respond to these experiments with dismay, judge that the subjects should not have administered the shocks as they were ordered, and hope we wouldn't have done so ourselves were we in their shoes. Gibbard points out, however, that, given the results, we should assume that we well might have, albeit with conflict and reservations. After all, 80 percent of the subjects administered shocks to at least 225 volts (halfway up the shock generator). Gibbard analyzes this case as involving the acceptance of conflicting norms—against harming others and against disobeying authority. But though subjects genuinely accepted norms of both kinds, many were also "in the grip" of a norm of authority in the

<sup>23</sup> The experiments are described and analyzed at length in Milgram 1974. For an excellent discussion, see Sabini and Silver 1982: chs. 3–5, 9–11.

sense that, in the circumstances, the norm seemed to override and ground weightier reasons than the norm against harm, although this was the reverse of what many of the subjects (on reflection) actually accepted. And it seems possible, moreover, to be, as it were, in the grip of a norm entirely, that is, for it to seem to provide normative reasons, even though we reject it on reflection and judge that it gives no normative reasons whatsoever.

The sort of normative acceptance that is revealed in the Milgram experiments is psychically different from desire. We can say, of course, that the subjects wanted not to disobey, that they wanted not to harm, and that, in the circumstances, they evidently wanted the former more than they did the latter. And in the directed attention sense of desire, at least, we can say that, in having these desires it seemed to them that there were reasons to desire, and thus to bring about, states of the world in which they did not harm. But it seems obvious that the Milgram subjects didn't just want these latter states pure and simple; they wanted them, at least partly, because they thought they shouldn't harm.24 Their desires followed their norms; they were principle-dependent rather than object-dependent. And because of this, their psychic conflict, caught between norms dictating conflicting actions, was palpably different from that of someone who merely has conflicting object-dependent desires, that is, desires for two outcomes that cannot simultaneously be realized. It showed itself in forms of agitation, upset, and emotional distress that are quite different from the conflict of someone forced to choose between two alternatives to which she is averse, but which otherwise violate no norm that she accepts or that grips her.

### **Accepting Moral Norms and the Second Person**

I have been pursuing the evidence, both speculative and empirical, for the human capacity for norm acceptance because it is an essential aspect of second-personal competence. When you and I address second-personal demands to one another, we presuppose that we both have the capacity to accept and act on second-personal norms that ground relevant second-personal reasons irrespectively of our (object-dependent) desires for states of the world. That was an essential aspect even in our first example, when

<sup>24</sup> Of course, they might also have wanted this out of, say, sympathy.

you addressed a demand to someone to get off of your feet. The reason you purported to address to him came not from the badness of your being in pain (as this might be represented in a desire that you be free of it) but from a norm proscribing foot treading. And in addressing the reason to him, you consequently assumed that he could accept and act on it irrespectively of any (object-dependent) desire that your feet be free of pain, or even of pain caused by foot treading (that was the agentrelative aspect of the reason).25

What I have said in this chapter so far has concerned (practical) norm acceptance in general. It seems possible, however, to have that capacity while lacking psychic mechanisms that are involved in accepting and recognizing norms that relate to second-personal reasons in particular. To instantiate second-personal competence, the human repertoire must include something, like reactive attitudes, that mediates second-personal accountability, along with the capacity to reflect on and revise these in critically accepting second-personal norms and reasons.

In this connection, Gibbard notes that the emotional manifestations exhibited in the Milgram experiments show not just any norms were in play, but that peculiarly social ones were operating. Violating a prudential norm is unlikely, by itself, to give rise to the sorts of feelings of embarrassment, shame, and guilt that the Milgram subjects evidently felt. If I keep eating the nuts, the thought that I shouldn't because it is bad for me cannot support feelings like these unless I somehow connect it to some ideal of a presentable or morally decent self, so that I am embarrassed by publicly displayed intemperance, or ashamed even when I keep eating the nuts in private, or feel remorse that I never seem to leave enough for others.

Most importantly for our purposes, the norms that seem most obviously involved in the Milgram experiments are second-personal, moral norms. They concern what people have the authority to demand. Norms of obedience are second-personal by their very nature, and I have argued that any moral obligation not to harm is second-personal also. Moreover,

<sup>25</sup> Recall that in saying you presupposed these things, I am not making a psychological claim. I am not saying that you actually thought, or that I can reasonably take you to have thought these things (although you may have). I am saying that the second-personal competence of your addressee was a normative felicity condition of your address: the reason you purported to address can be validly addressed only if your addressee has second-personal competence.

an analysis of the experimental setup and results reveals that there were second-personal aspects at play in the responses of subjects that went beyond even the second-personal character of the implicated norms. For example, that the subjects were under instructions they had some obligation to comply with as consenting participants in the experiments was not just made evident to them as an abstract proposition. The authority figure was actually there in the same room with them, and he ordered them. When subjects questioned whether they "had" to go on, or protested about being ordered to, the apparently authoritative experimenter responded with a sequence of increasingly forceful "prods": (1) "Please continue" or "Please go on," (2) "The experiment requires that you continue," (3) "It is absolutely essential that you continue," and (4) "You have no other choice, you *must* go on" (Milgram 1974: 21).

Presently, we shall consider how these prods might have worked psychically. First, however, we should note that they were not the only second-personal element in the experiment.26 In the initial setup, the learner was in an adjoining room. He could not be seen and, up until the point when he was administered a shock level of 300 volts, he could not be heard. At this point, however, the learner began audibly pounding on the wall. The pounding continued through 315 volts, after which there was no sound at all coming from the room and, indeed, the learner stopped responding in the learning exercise (which the subjects were instructed to treat as mistakes). In the initial experiment, none of the forty subjects stopped administering shocks before they heard any protest. Five, however, stopped at the first expression of protest. Four stopped on the next round (315 volts), two on the next, and one on each of the next two. So thirteen out of forty subjects (32.5 percent) stopped the shocks within five rounds of the first protest. Moreover, these were 100 percent of the subjects who stopped at all.27

A second setup was identical, except that vocal protests could be heard through the walls throughout. In this version, almost the same number continued until the end—twenty-five instead of twenty-seven. But eight stopped obeying orders to shock in the "Strong Shock" range (135–180 volts), well before the 300 volts that drew the first disobedience in the first setup.

<sup>26</sup> The details that follow come from Milgram's description of the different setups of the experiment, together with the data (1974: 32–43).

<sup>27</sup> The rest (twenty-seven) continued administering shocks until the end (450 volts).

In a third setup, the learner was placed in the same room, a few feet from the subject, and could be both seen and heard. Here thirteen subjects stopped obeying by the end of the "Strong Shock" range, and only a minority, sixteen, administered the full series of shocks (almost 40 percent less full compliance than in the initial setup).

A fourth, and final, setup was identical to the third, except that the learner received a shock only when his hand rested on a shock plate. At the 150-volt level, the learner demanded to be set free and refused to place his hand on the shock plate, whereupon the experimenter ordered the subject to force the victim's hand onto the plate so that he could receive the shocks the subject administered. Remarkably, in this setup twelve subjects continued to the end, but even so this was less than half of the number that did so in the first version. More importantly, twenty (or half the subjects) stopped in the "Strong Shock" range, long before, again, there was any disobedience in the first setup.

Clearly, having protests addressed to them made a significant difference in the subjects' behavior. There was no disobedience in the first setup before any audible protest, and almost 80 percent of the disobedience that did occur took place during or just after the protest (eleven out of thirteen). In the second, protest was audible earlier, and there was also significantly greater disobedience earlier. In the third, protest (and its grounds) were both visibly and audibly evident, and this also significantly increased earlier disobedience. And in the fourth, in which subjects were ordered not just to administer shocks despite the protest but also to enforce a denial of learner's demands to be set free (and arguably to punish them for their demands), the disobedience was greatest of all.

The conflicts that the Milgram subjects experienced were not just between conflicting norms, but between conflicting second-personal norms that grounded demands. Moreover, these demands were at some point or other actually addressed by those the subjects took to have the authority to address them. Both their acceptance of the norms and the address of normatively grounded demands seemed to have psychic consequences. The norms were constant throughout the various setups, as was the experimenter's addressing of orders. What was variable was the evidence and salience of the learners' protests.

But why focus on protest? What varied was not just that but also evidence and salience of pain and of causing pain. Why not say that it was the increasing amount and vividness of the learners' suffering that explained the increased disobedience? But consider: how was the pounding on the wall likely to have been experienced by subjects in the first setup? Presumably, the pain was now getting to be so bad that the learner was asking the subject and the experimenter to stop. As one subject said, "I think he's trying to communicate, he's knocking" (Milgram 1974: 32).

Think about it from the subject's perspective. The learner is, you believe, someone like you who has volunteered to take part in the experiment. You might think that, like you, he feels obligated to take part. You might even think (if only as a rationalization) that it would be unfair to him not to play your role so long as he does. At the least, you certainly would think that whether he has consented to being caused pain is relevant to whether you should cause it to him. These are all second-personal matters. They concern your respective claims and how you and he have the authority to interrelate as mutually accountable equals.

The most significant change in the overall rate of disobedience came when the learner was moved into the same room with the subject. The subject could then see the effects of what he was doing. But also importantly, he was aware, for the first time, of the learner's awareness of him. Even if audible protests were experienced as claims in the first two setups, the conditions made reciprocal recognition impossible. Bringing the learner into the room gave him a presence as someone to whom the subject was accountable—a second-personal advantage the experimenter had in all the setups. Milgram himself notes the possible relevance of this factor:

Possibly, it is easier to harm a person when he is unable to observe our actions than when he can see what we are doing. His surveillance of the action directed against him may give rise to shame or guilt, which may then serve to curtail the action. Many expressions of language refer to the discomfort or inhibitions that arise in face-to-face attack. It is often said that it is easier to criticize a man "behind his back" than to confront him directly. (1974: 38–39)

The other was present now not just as someone with the standing to demand compliance with a norm requiring that he not be harmed but also as someone with some standing to judge one's compliance with it.28

<sup>28</sup> Another relevant study was conducted by John Thibaut and Laurens Walker, who were interested in assessing psychological aspects of adversarial systems of criminal justice. Subjects were read a set of facts about an assault case, half incriminating, half exculpatory, and asked to assess guilt or innocence. In one setup, the facts were read to the subjects by one person. In another, they were read by two people, with one "representing" the accused by reading only exculpatory facts, and the other "representing" the prosecution. Subjects who were read the facts in the second setup were significantly likelier to think the defendant innocent than in the first (1975: 42–53).

That second-personal aspects of the situation make a psychic difference seems obvious enough.29 But how does this work? And how do the mechanisms involved interact with norm acceptance? No doubt we are, to some extent, moved by desires for others' approval or esteem, or by desires not to be in disagreement with them, even when we care nothing for the standards they employ or have no inclination to share their views. But we are so moved only to some extent. Aristotle noted that we care more about honor and esteem from those we honor and esteem ourselves, and he concluded that this must be because we care independently (and more) about meriting the esteem of those whom we accord the authority to judge us (1980: I.5).

This seems clearly on the mark. When subjects in the Milgram experiments were troubled by the protests of those they were shocking in the same room with them, it seems incredible that they were simply experiencing the discomfort of being regarded in demanding ways. It seems much more likely that, to varying degrees, empathy took them inside their victims' perspectives and that at least some subjects experienced emotions such as shame and guilt in which they empathically regarded themselves as warranting disdain (shame) and/or blame or some other

<sup>29</sup> In another Milgram experiment, subjects were subway riders who were asked to give up their seats without any reason that might justify such a request. When Milgram first asked his students to conduct this experiment, he was surprised by their reluctance and the difficulty they reported in executing it. He decided to conduct some trials himself. A newspaper account reports his experience: "But when he approached his first seated passenger, he found himself frozen. 'The words seemed lodged in my trachea and would simply not emerge,' he said in the interview. Retreating, he berated himself: 'What kind of craven coward are you?' A few unsuccessful tries later, he managed to choke out a request. 'Taking the man's seat, I was overwhelmed by the need to behave in a way that would justify my request,' he said 'My head sank between my knees, and I could feel my face blanching. I was not role-playing. I actually felt as if I were going to perish.' " (Michael Luo, " 'Excuse Me. May I Have Your Seat?': Revisiting a Social Experiment, And the Fear That Goes With It," *New York Times*, September 14, 2004.) Years later, one of Milgram's students who ran the experiment remembered a response of one of the subjects whose seat he requested. "The woman snapped: 'If I were standing and you were sitting, I think it'd be very reasonable to ask you for your seat, but I'm not going to give you my seat.' " This seems clear evidence of second-personal psychic phenomena. I am indebted to Tristram McPherson for reminding me of this experiment.

form of second-personal accountability.30 How else can we explain the depth and variety of psychic conflict that must have been involved, at least for some? The conflicting external demands of experimenter and victims would likely have been replicated, to varying degrees, empathically within the subjects' own outlooks on themselves.

This fits, again, with what we learned about the role of empathy in second-personal thought in Chapter 3. When I am engaged by another's address second-personally, I inevitably gain a second-personal perspective on myself. I can grasp the other's responses as second-personal only if I see them in relation to my own. And I can do that only if I can see my address as from the other's point of view. By being vulnerable to the other in this way, I am susceptible to appearances as from the other's standpoint. Thus blame can be felt as guilt.31 Of course, blame also elicits defensive responses, but that simply proves the same point. If we weren't vulnerable to seeing ourselves as others see us empathically, and hence to blaming ourselves, there would be nothing to defend against.

It is useful to compare here what Mill says about moral sanctions in chapter 3 of *Utilitarianism,* in which he considers the normative (or, as he interprets this, the motivating) force of the principle of utility. "What is its sanction?" he asks. "What are the motives to obey it? Or more specifically, what is the source of its obligation? Whence does it derive its binding force?" (1998: ch. 3, §1). Mill first discusses "external sanctions,"

<sup>30</sup> Compare here Adam Smith on the natural disposition to defer to superiors owing to empathetic projection into their standpoint: "Upon this disposition of mankind, to go along with all the passions of the rich and the powerful, is founded the distinction of ranks, and the order of society. Our obsequiousness to our superiors more frequently arises from our admiration from the advantages of their situation, than from any private expectations of benefit from their good-will. . . . The strongest motives, the most furious passions, fear, hatred, and resentment, are scarce sufficient to balance this natural disposition to respect them" (1982b: 52–53).

<sup>31</sup> A related phenomenon is the familiar experience of simply being persuaded by a vivid representation that another person forcefully makes. (An example: One day I went to my local pool to swim laps. Because work was being done on the glass door connecting to the outside deck, and it was the dead of winter, the water was colder than usual. An elderly woman before me in line turned to me and said, "It's 75 degrees. You can't possibly swim in that." Because she had spoken so authoritatively, I was persuaded. I saw things as she painted them. When I got back to my car, I thought: "You know, 75 degrees isn't *that* cold. I've often swum in 75 degrees and colder." By then, however, I was in my warm car, full of rationalizations about why it was really a better thing that I not swim that day anyway.)

within which he includes "hope of favour and the fear of displeasure" from others and from God, whether selfishly or from sympathy or "awe" that inclines us to accord with their will. But Mill gives these short shrift. His chief interest is in the "internal sanction." This "ultimate sanction," Mill says, is "conscience": "a feeling in our own mind; a pain, more or less intense, attendant on violation of duty, which in properly cultivated moral natures rises, in the more serious cases, into shrinking from it as an impossibility" (ch. 3, §3).32

But what makes conscience an internal rather than external sanction? The desire to avoid the displeasure of others is no less internal to the psyche than are feelings of conscience. Why does it make a difference whether the displeasure originates with others or with oneself? Perhaps one can avoid others' displeasure more easily than one can one's own, but Mill's discussion puts no weight on that possibility. What he stresses is the way conscience makes one feel toward the action itself. When moral norms have been internalized, the thought of an action the norms require "presents itself to the mind with the feeling of being *in itself* obligatory" (1998: ch. 3, §1). In a "properly cultivated moral nature," the thought of violating a central norm, strikes one "as an impossibility." What makes conscience an internal sanction, therefore, is not its psychic location. Pain resulting from others' displeasure is no less an internal state than that of being displeased with ourselves. What makes conscience an internal sanction for Mill is rather its object. When we consider that we have done something we think wrong, we don't just have a painful feeling. We have a painful "appearance" that we shouldn't have done what we did, that not doing it was "*in itself* obligatory." We have a putative awareness of having acted contrary to what members of the moral community (and we ourselves as such members) justifiably demand.33

Second-personal address that appeals to shared norms, like remon-

<sup>32</sup> Mill argues that although conscience's dictates naturally give the "intuitive" "customary morality" of common sense an advantage, this can be eroded by the "dissolving force of analysis" over time if accepting it is not socially beneficial. Utilitarian morality, on the other hand, has another psychological support that tends to mold conscience in its direction, namely, "the desire to be in unity with our fellow creatures" (1998: ch. 3, §9, 10) Ultimately, time is on utilitarianism's side, and when it becomes widely accepted, conscience will dictate complying with it.

<sup>33</sup> Here I draw on Mill's analysis of 'wrong' and moral obligation, which I discussed in Chapter 5.

strance or blame, can give rise empathically to conscientious feelings that are tied to those norms. Milgram's subjects most likely experienced conflicting normative feelings whose vividness depended on the salience of others' second-personal authority to demand their compliance. Of course, such forms of address can trigger defensive responses also. But part of the reason they can, again, is to defend the self against blame's hitting home and being experienced as guilt. Through empathy we can feel not just others' blame but also that we are to blame.

Thus, one way in which empathy and second-personal address can interact with normative psychology is in the exchange of reactive attitudes and the engendering of conscientious feelings and even normative acceptance. I argued in Chapter 4 that reactive attitudes have a second-personal conceptual structure that calls for a reciprocally recognizing response of which it presupposes its (implicitly addressed) object to be capable. For ordinary human beings, empathy provides the psychological mechanism that funds this presupposition.

To conclude this section, I shall briefly mention one other way in which empathy and second-personal address can figure in our normative psychology, namely, in critical normative discussion, both about individual cases and about norms themselves. Gibbard speculates that norm acceptance has a distinctive evolutionary role that enables human beings to use language and linguistically encoded motivations to solve coordination problems (1990: 64–80). Norm acceptance manifests itself not just in regulating conduct but also in tendencies to avow the norm in contexts of "unconstrained normative discussion" (74). By normative discussion, Gibbard means not just the sort of thing that moralists, moral philosophers, or writers to editorial pages engage in but also something that is virtually ubiquitous in human life, from gossip, to discussion of novels, movies, and sitcoms, to "I was like . . . ; He was like . . ." conversations in which participants display their reactions to others' actions and feelings.34 In all of these instances, people negotiate questions of how it makes sense to respond to what people do and what norms for evaluating conduct it makes most sense to accept. And as they do, empathy works to bring others' views inside our perspective so that they can be part of our own critical reflection and not just recorded as what others think. Second-

<sup>34</sup> On the relevance of gossip to shared moral reflection, see Sabini and Silver 1982: ch. 5 ("A Plea for Gossip").

personal accountability is not the only form of social criticism, of course, but surely much of what human beings discuss concerns what they and we can warrantedly expect and demand of one another.

### **Cooperation and Second-Personal Motivation**

Other experiments demonstrate and illustrate the involvement of second-personal psychic mechanisms in human cooperation. Why do people cooperate when it is against their interests to do so? Cooperation is any organized pattern of interaction in which, although the overall pattern advances the cooperating individuals' interests, it nonetheless requires actions from the participants that are less than optimal individually. The classic example is Prisoner's Dilemma, in which the parties do better if both pursue a cooperative strategy, but where the individually optimal strategy is non-cooperative.35 Two people face a Prisoner's Dilemma when each profits most by an outcome of their respective actions by which the other profits least (for example, by arming while a hostile foe disarms), but when both profit more if they both do something that is individually suboptimal (say, both disarming). Each party orders his outcomes thus: first: I arm, she disarms; second: we both disarm; third: we both arm; and fourth: I disarm, she arms. In such a situation, advancing one's interests seems unambiguously to recommend arming, since, whatever the other does, one comes out better. But this leads both to an outcome that is worse for both than would have resulted if they had done what is collectively best but individually suboptimal (both disarming).

Because the orthodox view in much contemporary social science, not to mention practical philosophy, has been that self-interested behavior is rational by default, the problem has been to explain why human beings cooperate as much as we evidently do. No motivation beyond preference satisfaction or self-interest is required to explain cooperation in cases with the structure of an "iterated" Prisoner's Dilemma, in which "tit for tat" or some other strategy requring actions that would be suboptimal in a "one shot" game may be most optimal for players even individually (Axelrod 1984). When there are repeated plays, it will pay individually to cooperate now to draw out reciprocating cooperation from fellow players

<sup>35</sup> For a short introduction to the Prisoner's Dilemma, see Barry and Hardin 1982: 11–12, 24–25.

later. But many studies have revealed much human cooperation that cannot be explained by self-interested strategies even of this sort.

There is growing empirical evidence that normative acceptance, including of a distinctively second-personal kind, is frequently involved.36 Some especially interesting experiments conducted by Ernst Fehr and Simon Gächter suggest that reactive attitudes are often implicated. Fehr and Gächter (2002) gave groups of four subjects 20 money units (MUs) each, from which each could contribute any amount to a group project and keep any amount she didn't contribute. For every MU invested in the project overall, each of the members earned 0.4 MUs, regardless of her own investment. Thus the investor's return from investing one additional MU was 0.4 MUs (and the expected return of not investing it was 1 MU). If, however, all group members invested no MUS, each would end up with 20 MUs, whereas if all of them invested all of their 20 MUs, each subject would earn 32 MUs.

The variable condition manipulated by the experiment was whether the round of contributions was (known to be) followed by a round in which subjects could anonymously "punish" noncontributors. In this condition, the subjects were given a profile of the others' contributions in the first round without attribution. Each could then assign from 0 to 10 points to any other individual, at a cost of 3 MUs per point to the "punished" subject and 1 MU to the "punishing" subject, respectively. Thus individuals could punish only at cost to themselves.37

Unsurprisingly, when the cooperative contribution rounds were run before subsequent punishment rounds (and this was known in advance), there was a higher level of cooperation than without expected punishment (approximately 13 MUs to 11 MUs). This also increased over time,

<sup>36</sup> Especially good is Fehr and Schmidt 1999. Much of this literature is discussed in Ben-Ner and Putterman 1998. For an excellent critical review, see Anderson 2000. See also Mansbridge 1990. For an excellent argument that punishment-based accounts of human cooperation are significantly better than reciprocity-based accounts within an evolutionary framework, see Sripada 2005.

<sup>37</sup> The experiment consisted of six contribution rounds, one set run with paired punishment rounds, one without. To rule out repetition creating cooperation or punishment through tit-for-tat reciprocity or reputation, the group composition continuously changed so that no subject ever met another subject more than once. On the "evolution" of reciprocity in iterated activity, see Axelrod 1984 and Trivers 1971. On reputation effects, see Alexander 1987; Leimar and Hammerstein 2001; Lotem, Fishman, and Stone 1999; Nowak and Sigmund 1998a, 1998b; Wedekind and Milinski 2000.

whereas later cooperation levels without punishment were lower. By the sixth round, the mean cooperation with punishment was above 14 MUs, whereas without punishment, it declined to below 6 MUs. Considered so far, however, these results might be explained simply by a self-interested desire to avoid sanctions.

The more interesting and important finding is that the subjects were prepared to punish at cost to themselves, sometimes at significant cost.38 A total of 84.3 percent of the subjects punished at least once during the six periods, 34.3 percent punished more than five times, and 9.3 percent punished more than ten times. Fehr and Gächter term the punishment "altruistic," but by this they evidently mean just that subjects were prepared to hold non-cooperators responsible even at cost to themselves. Subjects reported that they responded with negative emotions to failures to cooperate and that they expected others to respond to them with these same attitudes when they failed to cooperate. Asked how they would feel in hypothetical scenarios in which they are taken advantage of by free riders, subjects predicted they would respond with significant "anger and annoyance," as they predicted others would respond to them if they free rode.

It seems clear enough that reactive attitudes like resentment and indignation were involved that appeared to subjects to be warranted by others' failure to cooperate. Subjects who had these reactive responses would have seen themselves as having a reason, a second-personal reason, to hold the non-cooperators responsible quite independently of reasons of other kinds, self-interest, for example. And evidently enough, these reasons were not only independent of self-interest; for almost 85 percent of the subjects, they apparently outweighed it.39

But if subjects were susceptible to reactive attitudes in responding to others, these feelings would have been no less available by empathic projection in their imagined and actual responses to themselves. And this would then have given them motivations to cooperate themselves that

<sup>38</sup> Of course, it can be said that in these cases subjects also got the benefits of satisfying their resentment, but while this is no doubt true, this seems to be a principle-based desire in the sense that resentment involves at least the appearance of a second-personal reason.

<sup>39</sup> There were also likely self-interested considerations that were related to the second-personal reasons involved in the reactive attitudes, for example, the desire not to have to live with the painful awareness of being taken advantage of. But these would have been parasitic on the second-personal reasons.

are quite distinct from a desire to avoid sanctions.40 For example, such feelings could have functioned as a vivid reminder of a second-personal norm they accepted, which their apparently warranted reactive attitude itself "enforces." Alternatively, or in addition, putting themselves in the shoes of imagined punishers could have given rise empathically to reactive attitudes directed toward themselves.41 And in feeling, for example, that they would be to blame for freeloading, they would, in effect, be addressing to themselves a second-personal reason to cooperate.

In any or all of these ways, subjects implicitly saw themselves and others as having, in our terms, the authority to address the second-personal demands that were implicit in the "punishment" they meted out and, therefore, second-personal reasons to comply with these demands. If the threat of resentment provides an important support to cooperation, as these experiments suggest, then the implicit presupposition of second-personal standing must play an important role as well. Indeed, there is evidence that the perceived legitimacy of sanctions, that is, whether they are seen as genuinely authoritative and applied in good faith or simply strategic threats, is itself a significant determinant of levels of cooperation. Fehr and Rockenbach have shown that when sanctions are believed to be applied self-interestedly rather than as expressing valid demands in holding others responsible, this actually diminishes cooperation, that is, makes it less than it would be even in a no-punishment condition.42 This is a remarkable result, since from the strategic point of view, (second-personally) unjustifiable sanctions are no less undesirable and sensibly avoided than are justified ones.

Second-personal psychic mechanisms evidently run sufficiently deep that people are willing to forego benefits or incur costs not only to address

<sup>40</sup> Except, of course, a desire to avoid justified sanctions (as in Pufendorf 's Point). But these also would have been parasitic on the second-personal reasons that justify the sanctions.

<sup>41</sup> On the importance of "empathic anger" in moral development, see Hoffman 2000: 96–102.

<sup>42</sup> Fehr and Rockenbach explain this difference as follows: "Our results suggest that the moral legitimacy of the sanction is a crucial factor. In the public good context the punishment of 'free-riders' is an altruistic act that is considered as morally legitimate.... In the present context, punishment serves the punisher's self-interest and, if it is used to enforce an unfair payoff distribution in favour of the punisher, it decreases altruistic responses" (2003: 137–140). Again, Fehr and his colleagues tend to use 'altruistic' to mean 'cooperative'.

justified demands but also to defy unjustified ones. And human beings are not the only species in which a response of this sort has been observed. Brosnan and de Waal have found that capuchin monkeys who had been receiving equal rewards for equal effort in an experiment refused to participate further when they saw others beginning to receive more. Noting that there is substantial evidence that "a sense of fairness" is a human universal,43 they describe their findings as "supporting an early evolutionary origin for inequity aversion" (2003: 297). But if equity is, as seems clear, a matter of justified claims and demands, it follows that their research supports an early evolutionary origin for second-personal or proto-second-personal psychic mechanisms.

The relevance of the second-person stance to cooperation is further supported by another study by Robert Frank (1988) of the ability to discriminate between cooperators and non-cooperators. After a thirtyminute conversation about whether to cooperate in a one-shot Prisoner's Dilemma in which their subsequent plays were mutually blind, subjects predicted whether their interlocutors would cooperate or not. They were remarkably successful. Sixty percent of the participants who had been predicted to defect did so, and 75 percent of those who had been predicted to cooperate did so (134–145). The likelihood that such a high overall accuracy rate would happen by chance is less than one in a hundred. Moreover, subjects had substantially greater confidence in predictions that subsequently proved correct than in those that turned out to be incorrect. Simply on the basis of a thirty-minute conversation and with no knowledge or experience of their interlocutors' record of cooperation, participants manifested an extraordinary ability to predict whether another person would cooperate for mutual advantage or defect in his own individual interest.

What explains this success? Frank hypothesizes that it has to do with the detection of involuntary bodily symptoms, for example, facial expressions, of emotions that can motivate cooperation. This certainly seems correct. However, his candidates, evidence of sympathy, and emotions like shame and guilt would, in principle, be equally available to anyone who was watching the conversation from a third-person perspective as to those participating in it. And there is experimental evidence that people are not particularly good at detecting lying in general

<sup>43</sup> They cite Henrich 2000 and Henrich 2001.

(Ekman, O'Sullivan, and Frank 1999; Good 1999). There is evidently something about the authenticity of conversation, perhaps especially conversations about whether to cooperate, that enables people to detect it more readily.

I speculate that people in these situations are sensitive to reciprocal recognition, that is, they can detect whether they are being engaged in a serious second-personal deliberation about whether to cooperate in which someone is already according them second-personal authority in that very interaction. Consider: there is an important difference between the motivations that cooperators and defectors respectively have in discussions about whether to cooperate in a one-shot Prisoner's Dilemma. Since a self-interested defector's choice is entirely independent of whether he believes his interlocutor will cooperate or defect (since it will pay him to defect regardless), he has no stake in determining his interlocutor's intentions or motivations.44 His only motive in talking is to try to convince his interlocutor to cooperate. A cooperator, however, is motivated both to convince her interlocutor to cooperate and to determine whether he will actually follow through if he says he will, since even a cooperator reasonably wishes to avoid being taken advantage of. In scanning her interlocutor, she must determine whether he is similarly scanning her, that is, whether their scanning is mutual. When she looks into her interlocutor's eyes, does she see him looking back into hers to see whether she is looking into his to see whether she is looking into hers, and so on? A moment's reflection suggests that reciprocal interest of this sort is something we do quite frequently detect. Think of detecting reciprocal romantic or sexual interest. If that is so, cooperators can help assure one another in this way of their willingness to cooperate. In effect, each enables prediction of her willingness to respect an agreement to cooperate by evidently respecting one another in a conversation about whether to cooperate.

A related experimental result is the finding that when subjects converse about what to do in one-shot Prisoner's Dilemmas, cooperation is roughly doubled (Orbell, Dawes, and van de Kragt 1988, 1990). This is notable in itself, of course, since non-cooperation is still evidently the dominant strategy of rational self-interest, even after such a conversation has taken

<sup>44</sup> Unless, that is, he is sophisticated enough to realize that a sophisticated cooperator will be trying to determine whether he is trying to determine this.

place. After all, the other person will either act as agreed or not, and either way one will do better by defecting. So why is cooperation increased? It seems from these studies that it is not because such discussion heightens moral sensitivity generally, since it evidently does not increase cooperation with strangers. Again, something essentially second-personal seems to be going on. Conversants are likelier to cooperate with each other.

A natural explanation is that such cooperation is simply a further expression and extension of a reciprocal recognition that is already implicit, in some form, when two interlocutors have a serious conversation about what to do. We earlier noted Pettit and Smith's observation (1996) that serious conversation involves some measure of mutual respect and recognition of one another's authority. In discussing, moreover, what they are to do, either individually or together, each purports to recognize the other's authority to participate in such a practical discussion, in effect, a joint deliberation, and hence, to be a source of reasons to act (and not just of reasons to think that certain reasons for acting exist). They recognize one another as a source of claims on their respective wills and conduct and not just on their beliefs, even about what would be sensible action for either or both. They see each other as sources of second-personal reasons. Of course, this could all be simply illusion. I could be trying to get you to believe that I am a cooperator, including to believe that I am looking into your eyes to determine whether you are looking into mine to determine whether I am looking into yours, and so on. But that may not be so easy to fake.

A related possibility is that at least some such conversations give rise to a genuinely collective intention to cooperate, that is, that the conversants come to deliberate together from a "first-person plural" perspective: What shall we do? From this standpoint, cooperation clearly dominates over any other (collective) strategy. In discussing this possibility, Dawes notes that many of the conversations in his studies do indeed take the form of collective deliberations (Orbell, Dawes, and van de Kragt 1988, 1990). But this hypothesis does not conflict with the explanation that cooperation results from reciprocal recognition. According to Margaret Gilbert's "pool of wills" theory (1990, 1996a), in order for two people to decide, say, to take a walk together, each must communicate her willingness to the other (second-personally) to form a plural subject (a "pool of wills") for this purpose. But this means that they must already be reciprocally recognizing each other second-personally. In a slogan: The way to "we" runs through "you" and "I."45

### **Adam Smith on Judgments of Justice**

In Chapter 3, I briefly laid out Adam Smith's anticipation of the contemporary simulationist idea that attributing mental states to others frequently involves an empathic projection into their shoes, as well as Smith's remarks about the distinctively human disposition to "truck, barter, and exchange" and its relation to mutual respect. In the final section of this chapter, I wish to discuss briefly the role of empathic projection (and what Smith called "sympathy") in his theory of moral judgment, specifically, his theory of judgments of justice, since this supports the reflections of the last two sections.

According to Smith, when we judge an agent's action or motive, we do so by projecting (impartially, as though we were anyone) into the agent's perspective and viewing the practical situation as we imagine it to confront her in deliberation. If the person's actual decision and motive match those we simulate under these ideal conditions, then we judge them to be "proper." And when we judge someone's feeling or reaction, we do so from her perspective as a patient, viewing the situation, as we imagine it to face her, as someone responding to it.

It is important that Smithian moral judgments involve an implicit identification with others as having an independent point of view. This already pushes Smith's thought away from the observer-based virtue ethics of Hutcheson and Hume.46 Although Smith is a metaethical sentimentalist, like Hume and Hutcheson, it is an important difference between his view and theirs that Smithian judgments of propriety are made not from a third-person perspective but from idealized (impartially disciplined) versions of personal and interpersonal standpoints. What takes Smith even farther from Hutcheson and Hume, and into the second-person standpoint, is his metaethics of justice.47

Injustice, for Smith, is essentially tied to warranted resentment. It is not simply improper conduct but improper conduct to which the proper

<sup>45</sup> I discuss Gilbert's ideas in this connection in the next chapter.

<sup>46</sup> For discussion of this aspect of Hume and Hutcheson's views, see Darwall 1995a.

<sup>47</sup> For another interpretation of Smith that emphasizes interpersonal aspects, see Tugendhat 2004.

response is a second-personal reactive feeling to challenge or hold the agent accountable in some way. So on Smith's view, injustice can be judged only by projecting ourselves impartially into the agent's and, crucially, the affected parties' points of view and then considering whether to feel resentment from that perspective. This individual-patientregarding character of justice leads Smith to oppose utilitarian tradeoffs and to hold that resistance to injustice is warranted not by considerations of overall utility but by concern for the "very individual" who would be injured (1982a: 90, 138). Moreover, what we consider from the standpoint of affected parties is whether to respond with a distinctive feeling that itself presupposes mutual accountability between persons. Sympathy with victims' sense of injury involves, according to Smith, not simply a sharing of their sense of having been wronged. It also involves recognition of their authority to challenge the wrong by resisting it, or, failing that, to demand some form of compensation or punishment. It recognizes their second-personal authority to address demands of justice.48 We can only judge whether something is properly resented or resisted, therefore, by imagining being in the shoes of the affected parties and considering whether any of us, if reasonable, would feel a reactive, accountabilityseeking sentiment that implicitly lodges some second-personal challenge or complaint and addresses a second-personal reason to respect this challenge.

I bring Smith in at this point to buttress and give a framework for the experimental results of the preceding two sections. When subjects in the Milgram experiment experience emotional conflict between the conflicting claims of an authority figure, on the one hand, and their victims, on the other, it seems implausible that they simply experience these as incompatible external demands. To some extent or other, they likely project into their addressees' respective standpoints and feel the justice of their claims and their authority to blame and hold them accountable. There is experimental evidence, as we have seen, that sanctions increase cooperation when they are seen to be legitimate, but actually decrease it when they are believed only to be applied only strategically (Fehr and Rockenbach 2003). In the one situation, the sanctions are seen to be just,

<sup>48</sup> Consider in this connection what Smith says about those who feel guilt for having unjustly injured others. Even when their victims are ignorant of the crime, the guilty may be moved to confess their guilt and submit "themselves to the resentment of their offended fellow-citizens," in the hopes of some form of reconciliation (Smith 1982a: 118–119).

as subjects might judge in Smithian fashion by simulating the resentment and indignation of their (potential) punishers. In the altered situation, the subjects' simulation must lead not to resentment but to some selfinterested motive that cannot support a judgment of justice and the authority to hold accountable, that is, to a reason of the wrong kind.

What armchair moral philosophical and psychological speculation suggests, experimental psychology confirms. That we have distinctively second-personal normative psychological capacities seems, to quote Bishop Butler now in different context, to "be as strongly and plainly proved in all these ways, as it could possibly be proved, supposing there [were these psychic mechanisms] in our nature" (1983: I.6).49

<sup>49</sup> Butler was describing the empirical case for disinterested benevolence.

## 8. Interlude: Reid versus Hume on Justice (with Contemporary Resonances)

It will help to fill in our picture of second-personal aspects of cooperation and justice, and also set the stage for the constructive arguments of Part IV, if we pause at this point to consider Thomas Reid's critique of Hume's well-known claim that justice is an "artificial" or convention-based virtue and reflect on some contemporary implications of this critique. Hume famously argues that justice is conventional in the sense that it depends upon a self-interested agreement in intention among individuals, perhaps inexplicit, to regulate their conduct by certain rules (the rules of justice) so long as others do. In fact, Hume uses 'convention' to refer, in part, to such a set of shared intentions.1 Without a convention in this sense, he argues, nothing can be just or unjust. Neither, he claims, is there any intrinsic obligation to be just, even once rules of justice are established. The obligation to justice arises entirely from the usefulness of the convention. The "natural obligation" and "original motive to the establishment of justice" is a self-interested desire for the personal advantages that established practices of justice can bestow (Hume 1978: 498, 499). And the "moral obligation" to be just resides in a sentiment of approbation we feel by sympathy with the public interest that justice, as a rule, promotes (498–500).

It is important to Hume's analysis that the agreement that establishes rule-structured practices of property, promise, and contract is not itself any sort of promise or contract, explicit or implicit. Hume thinks that there can't really be any promises or contracts at this pre-conventional

<sup>1</sup> As we will see, Hume has a minimalist view of what is necessary for the intentions to be appropriately shared, more like that of Bratman (1993) than Gilbert (1990).

stage. But neither is any such explicit joint undertaking necessary, in his view. It is enough that individuals communicate to one another both their common interest in establishing practices of justice and their respective conditional intentions to follow the rules if others do. The agreement (or "convention") that results is not so much between the individuals as it is one that arises among them. It is a "coming together" of their individual wills.

Against these claims, Reid argues, first, that sentiments and motives related to justice emerge in normal human development without any "artificial" agreement no less than do those implicated in Humean "natural virtues" like benevolence. In effect, Reid sides with present-day explanations of cooperation and justice in terms of reactive attitudes (e.g., Fehr and Gächter's)2 as opposed to a Humean model that anticipates the "emergence of cooperation" or "reciprocal altruism" theories of Axelrod (1984) and Trivers (1971). Second, he claims that the idea of moral obligation is intrinsic to that of justice and is irreducible to justice's general usefulness (a version of Strawson's Point). And third, Reid argues that Hume's account misses key second-personal elements of justice, especially, the obligation to keep promises and contracts.3

Reid's critique of Hume resonates with themes we briefly noted in Margaret Gilbert's ideas about the agency of "plural subjects" (1990, 1996b), as well as with Scanlon's well-known critique of practice-based accounts of the obligation to keep promises (1990, 1998: 295–327). Exploring the connections to Gilbert's work helps clarify the relation between the second-person and first-person plural standpoints. And developing the links with Scanlon's helps prepare the way for my claim that a second-personal vindication of moral obligation, dignity, and autonomy of the sort I advance in Chapters 10 and 11 can also provide a foundation for Scanlon-style contractualism, as I argue in Chapter 12.

Central to Reid's critique of Hume is a distinction that Reid makes between "operations of the mind" that are "solitary" in the sense of being able to "exist, and be complete, without being expressed" or "known to any other person," and "social" operations, which "cannot exist without

<sup>2</sup> Although not cast explicitly in terms of reactive attitudes, I believe that Sripada (2005) can also be seen within this tradition.

<sup>3</sup> I was initially set thinking about these topics by Luca Parisoli's, "Hume and Reid on Promises" (2001), which I commented on at the David Hume Society Meetings, University College, Cork, Ireland, July 1999.

being expressed by words and signs, and known to the other." Without social operations, Reid says, a person might still "think, and reason, and deliberate, and will." But "it would be impossible for him to put a question, or give a command, to ask a favour, or testify a fact, to make a promise or a bargain" (Reid 1969: 438). Social mental operations are, in our terms, second-personal.4

### **Hume on Justice**

The main lines of Hume's theory of justice are well-known, so we can be relatively brief.5 Unlike "natural virtues" like benevolence and compassion, justice is socially useful (and therefore, Hume argues, morally virtuous), not instance by instance, but only in the aggregate; and not in every circumstance, but only in certain specifiable conditions—moderate scarcity and limited generosity—that, to be sure, characterize the main of human life. If goods or benevolence were in much greater supply than is usual or drastically scarce, justice would be either unnecessary or unavailing. And nothing is intrinsically admirable about the "cautious, jealous virtue" even when it is called for (Hume 1985b: 183). We approve of benevolence and compassion in themselves and regardless of their contexts, whereas with justice our approval derives from the fact that the "whole plan or scheme," the overall practice structured by the rules of justice, promotes the interests of all in normal human circumstances (1978: 497).6

Were we to rely only on our own resources or on the goodwill of

<sup>4</sup> Reid's *Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind* was published in 1788, twelve years after Adam Smith's discussion of the human disposition to "truck, barter, and exchange" in *Wealth of Nations* (1776), and eight years before J. G. Fichte's *Foundations of Natural Right* (1796), which established recognition *(Anerkennung)* as a central philosophical category of post-Kantian German philosophy.

<sup>5</sup> Hume lays them out in book 3, part 2 of *A Treatise of Human Nature* (Hume 1978) and section 3 of *An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals* (Hume 1985). Discussions include: Baier 1991; Cohon 1997; Darwall 1995a; Gauthier 1979, 1992; and Haakonssen 1981.

<sup>6</sup> The central idea here can be put by saying that Hume is operating with a "practice conception" rather than a "summary conception" of rules, in Rawls's sense (Rawls 1955). Justice is realized in rule-structured practices whose participants regard the rules as "sacred and inviolable" (Hume 1978: 533) rather than heuristics or "rules of thumb" for producing social good.

others, we would be left, although not perhaps in a Hobbesian state of nature, in a substantially less secure state than we can have with established practices that protect property and make promises, contracts, and the rule of law possible. Normally, human beings act to bring about some good to self or others: "The will exerts itself, when either the good or the absence of the evil may be attain'd by any action of the mind or body" (Hume 1978: 439, also 399). But though people act to benefit others as well as themselves, they naturally favor those who are near and dear (488). Without established rules of justice, we can have no warranted common expectations from friend, stranger, and foe alike to counter these natural human partialities.

The problem (at least, ultimately) is that rules of justice can play this role only if it is possible for individuals to undertake actions that cannot themselves be justified either by private or by public benefits, however long-term. The first phenomenon will be familiar from Prisoner's Dilemma. The "whole plan or scheme" of justice can benefit all only if the rules require individual sacrifice. Indeed, Hume writes, "it is easily conceived how a man may impoverish himself by a signal instance of integrity, and have reason to wish, that, with regard to that single act, the laws of justice were for a moment suspended in the universe" (1978: 497). But the same point applies to public benefit, as Hume appreciates. "A single act of justice is frequently contrary to public interest," as, for example, when a law, promise, or contract requires the restoration of "a great fortune to a miser, or a seditious bigot" (497).7 Without, however, individuals regulating themselves by rules of justice even when these require sacrificing long-term self-interest and public interest, the collective benefits of the "whole plan or scheme" cannot be achieved.

But how does Hume think it is possible for human beings to establish, sustain, and actually regulate themselves by rules of justice? Since the general benefits of established practices of justice are clear, there is no problem in understanding how individuals could want to live under rules of justice and, indeed, want to do whatever is necessary to see that they

<sup>7</sup> Actually, context suggests that Hume does not really mean here that acts required by rules of justice can be harmful on balance when we take full account of their effects on the general practice. And his view in the *Treatise* may be that this never happens. However, he clearly has this possibility in mind in the famous "sensible knave" passage from the second *Enquiry* (1985b: 282–283). For our purposes, we can ignore these complications. I discuss them in Darwall 1995a: 284–318.

are established and generally followed. The problem is how to go from the desire that rules of justice be in good working order, or even from the desire to regulate conduct by them or accept them oneself if that is necessary for public or private benefit, or from, that is, the thought that any or all of these would be desirable, to actually accepting or regulating conduct by them. It should be clear that this is simply another version of Strawson's Point and an instance of the "wrong kind of reasons" problem. Considerations of the desirable are reasons of the wrong kind to justify claims of justice or to warrant anything as a norm of justice.

Hume's solution is that the rules can be established by a *convention,* "a general sense of common interest" in everyone's regulating conduct by the rules and a consequent general "resolution" or "agreement" to do so (1978: 490). Everyone sees the benefits for himself and those he cares about of widespread obedience to justice's rules, which understanding all then "express to one another" along with the "resolution" each has "of squaring his actions by [them], on condition that others will do the same" (490, 498). This is enough, Hume says, to give whoever has the "first opportunity" an adequate motive to perform an act of justice as "an example to others" (497), who are then likelier to follow the rules and become models themselves. So far, so good. The likely desirability (good) of establishing conventions of justice is a reason of the right kind for trying to establish them. "And thus justice establishes itself by a kind of convention or agreement" (497). But the issue is how to establish a convention in such a way that participants themselves can then act for reasons of justice, that is for reasons of the kind that are distinctively relevant to enforcing claims of property, promises, and contracts—in our terms, for the relevant second-personal reasons.

A Humean convention is a "coming together" of individual wills, each resolving to follow the rules provided that others do too, in order to acquire the benefits of the cooperative endeavor of an established regime of justice.8 Hume's famous example of how it is possible for individuals

<sup>8</sup> For a different reading, see Postema 1995. Postema's "first-person plural" interpretation puts great weight on a distinction between the "common sense of interest" and "sense of common interest" that Hume himself does not consistently mark. Moreover, sympathy, which Postema is right to stress for its role in the first-person plural standpoint, evidently plays no role in Hume's explanation of the formation of the convention that establishes rules of justice. On the contrary, Hume quite clearly says that the original motive to establishing justice is self-interest.

to do this simply out of self-interest is that of "two men, who pull the oars of a boat by an agreement or convention, tho' they have never given promises to each other" (1978: 490). The convention, again, is simply the coincidence in their prudential conditional intentions to row so long as the other does. For this, it can be enough that they both want to get to the same place in the same boat.

We should note again explicitly, because it will be important later, that a Humean convention does not require anything like what we might more naturally call an "agreement" (either explicit or implicit) in what Margaret Gilbert calls the "everyday" sense in which, when two people agree to do something, they normally regard themselves as creating some resulting claim on one another, however weak.9 This is the sense in play, Gilbert (1990) argues, when, without anything as formal as a promise, people decide to do something, like take a walk, together. Doing something by agreement in this more robust sense is more like Smithian exchange. It involves at least an implicit invitation and acceptance in a second-personal space in which both parties understand the normative context. Both must presuppose that neither may simply force or rescind the agreement unilaterally and that each will have some resulting reason, however defeasible, to honor it, and to object, if the other doesn't.

Of course, two people might row a boat together as the result of an agreement of this kind also, but Hume's point is that they need not.10 Nothing second-personal is required. Without even implicit communication of the sort necessary for an "everyday" agreement, two people for whom it is common knowledge that both want to get from one shore to the other can simply approach the same rowboat, pick up a salient oar, begin to row, and not stop until they reach the opposite shore. If one or the other wants at any time to take a break, she can stop rowing, with some confidence that the other will likewise stop, and resume at whatever time it is mutually convenient, remaining confident that, since both want to get across, that will be sooner rather than later. Of course, things may not be so simple.

<sup>9</sup> As against Gilbert, however, I argue that this reason is not simply overridable; it is defeasible—so defeasible, in fact, that it may never have any force at all if, for example, the agreement is coerced.

<sup>10</sup> Gilbert's point, of course, is that Hume's oarsmen are not really rowing the boat together. If one stops, and the other says, "Hey, I thought we were rowing together," the first could quite reasonably reply, "What do you mean, 'we'?"

The same features are present in iterated Prisoner's Dilemma where tit-for-tat or some more complex strategy is evidently better for both players, both collectively and individually, than the non-cooperative strategy that dominates in a one-shot Prisoner's Dilemma (Axelrod 1984). In fact, rowing until the other stops and stopping until the other rows just is tit-for-tat. Hume's view is that the situation facing individuals who have not yet established practices of justice will be substantially the same from the "first opportunity" for compliance. If it is common knowledge that it is in everyone's interest that justice be established, then the situation is relevantly similar to that of two people approaching a boat that can take them both to the opposite shore. Perhaps the first complier takes more of a risk than someone does in making incipient rowing motions. Nevertheless, so long as she is in a position to survey others' future compliance and to withdraw her compliance if others do, and so long as that is sufficiently evident and of sufficient concern to others, this may be similar enough to the rowing case and iterated Prisoner's Dilemma to make it sensible for individuals to comply with rules of justice in their own interest.

But Hume acknowledges that this reasoning can work only on a relatively small scale. When society becomes sufficiently "numerous," the interests at stake are "more remote; nor do men so readily perceive, that disorder and confusion follow upon every breach of these rules" (1978: 499).11 At this point, people can no longer rely on the general sense that individual violations put the "whole plan or scheme" at risk. With large enough numbers, therefore, self-interest is no longer an adequate motive to justice. Self-interest continues to recommend acting justly when this is necessary to sustain the practice, but when it isn't, and when the gains to self are sufficiently great, it recommends that one act unjustly.

We should note, again, that the same point holds for benevolence of any form, however partial or universal. Once numbers are sufficiently large, and the connection between individual violations and the health of the practice is sufficiently remote, then concern for the welfare of particular individuals, or groups, or even for everyone's welfare, can likewise

<sup>11</sup> This passage suggests, as I mentioned in footnote 7, that in the *Treatise,* Hume believes that breaches of the rule actually are against violators' interests. The problem he is pointing to here, however, is that, even if it were more for violators' long-term interest to comply, they can't be relied upon to perceive this. Again, we need not worry about this complication.

recommend injustice. "Donating" a seditious bigot's property to Oxfam may, if kept sufficiently secret, better advance the overall welfare even when due account is taken of its effect on practices of justice. In such a case, universal benevolence recommends injustice rather than justice. And it seems clear that for benevolent motives targeted on groups of whatever size or character, similar examples could be found.

It follows that when rules of justice are meant to bind together sufficiently large groups, neither self-interest nor any sort of benevolence can provide the necessary bond. It is at this point, Hume believes, that a moral obligation to be just must come into play. However, if matters have been relatively straightforward to this point, they now begin to get very complicated, for two chief reasons. One is that Hume's is a virtue ethics; consequently what he generally calls "moral obligation" is a sentiment of approbation or disapprobation whose object is never, in the first instance, an act, but always some motive or trait of character of which an act is, at best, a "sign." "When we praise any actions, we regard only the motives that produced them, and consider the actions as signs or indications of certain principles in the mind and temper" (Hume 1978: 477).12 The second is that what makes justice an artificial virtue in Hume's view is precisely that there is no "natural" motive (e.g., neither selfinterest nor benevolence of any kind) that invariably recommends justice. So the question arises, if moral obligation consists in or rests on the moral sentiment, and if the moral sentiment takes motives or traits as its proper objects and is directed toward acts only as signs of these, then what is the motive or trait of justice? In other words, which motive is the object of the approbation in which the obligation to justice consists?

The answer cannot be self-interest precisely for the reason we have just seen; when the numbers are sufficiently large, self-interest no longer invariably recommends justice. But neither can it be any sort of benevolence for a reason of the very same kind. Of course, Hume might argue, as Hobbes has sometimes been interpreted in his response to the fool, that since the stakes of having well-functioning practices of justice are so large, and since people are notoriously so bad at knowing when their actions will actually have deleterious effects on the practice (or their own repu-

<sup>12</sup> Any inclination to think that Hume is talking about a species of merit here that is different from that involved in justice should be dispelled by the fact that he makes this claim at the beginning of Part III ("Of Justice and Injustice") as part of an argument that justice is an artificial virtue.

tation), the correct self-interested strategy is never to violate the rules of justice (Hobbes 1994: XV.4; Kavka 1995). And a similar argument might be made from benevolence, either partial or universal. But although these strategies are logically open, they don't seem to be Hume's.

In his reply to a "sensible knave" who questions what reason there is to be just when it is not advantageous, Hume does point out that even the most careful knave risks being hoisted by his own petard.13 (1985b: 283). But Hume also says that the knave's challenge cannot adequately be met in its own (self-interested) terms: "If a man think, that this reasoning much requires an answer, it will be a little difficult to find any, which will to him appear satisfactory and convincing. If his heart rebel not against such pernicious maxims, if he feel no reluctance to the thoughts of villainy or baseness, he has indeed lost a considerable motive to virtue." This says that self-interest is by itself an inadequate motive to justice and that it requires supplementation by moral disapprobation of injustice. Hume ends his response, moreover, by saying that the knave misses the greatest satisfactions in life, which involve moral approbation: "the invaluable satisfaction of a character" and "peaceful reflection on one's own conduct" (283). This means that, if justice ends up coinciding with self-interest, it is only because moral reflection on one's own just motives and character closes the gap. But if that is so, the motive of justice of which moral sentiment approves cannot itself be self-interest, since, without the gap being closed already by moral approbation, selfinterest does not invariably recommend justice.

Before we return to considering what Hume thinks is the motive of justice, we should note a fundamental difference between what Hume means by 'moral obligation' (the moral sentiment), on the one hand, and second-personal reactive attitudes as these figure in moral accountability, on the other. This can be obscured by Hume's frequent use of 'blame' as a synonym for disapprobation and his discussion of a kind of responsibility in relation to freedom of the will. I cannot discuss these topics adequately here, but, as I noted briefly in comparing Hume to Smith at

<sup>13</sup> Thus, the virtuous have "the frequent satisfaction of seeing knaves, with all their pretended cunning and abilities, betrayed by their own maxims; and while they purpose to cheat with moderation and secrecy, a tempting incident occurs, nature is frail, and they give into the snare; whence they can never extricate themselves, without a total loss of reputation, and the forfeiture of all future trust and confidence with mankind" (Hume 1985b: 283).

the end of the last chapter, approbation and disapprobation for Hume are *third-personal* responses rather than second-personal reactive attitudes like resentment, as it figures in Smithian judgments of justice, or indignation or second-personal blame.14 Hume does frequently use the word 'blame,' as I've said, but it is clear that he doesn't have anything essentially second-personal in mind, since he speaks of blame for involuntary flaws and famously criticizes the distinction "usual in all systems of ethics" between moral virtues and vices and natural abilities and disabilities.15 And although he thinks that moral evaluation involves attributing a kind of responsibility, it is one concerned with identifying "durable and constant" traits of character as a solid basis for esteem rather than with second-personal moral accountability as we have been conceiving it (1985a: 98).16

So what, then, does Hume think is the motive of justice? One possibility, which I have explored elsewhere and that is suggested by various passages, is that Hume supposes that the trait of justice involves accepting rules of justice as valid norms.17 And moral approbation of justice consists in approval of this trait.18

This proposal supplies a motive for moral sentiment to approve of and reasons of the right kind to be just, but there are several reasons, rooted in deep philosophical commitments of Hume's, why he cannot easily

<sup>14</sup> For more extensive discussion see Darwall 1994, 1999b, and 2004a.

<sup>15</sup> "I would have any one give me a reason why virtue and vice may not be involuntary, as well as beauty and deformity. These moral distinctions arise from the natural distinctions of pain and pleasure; and when we receive those feelings from the general consideration of any quality or character, we denominate it vicious or virtuous" (Hume 1978: 608–609). See also appendix 4, "Of Some Verbal Disputes," to Hume 1985b, where Hume argues that the distinction between moral vice and virtue, on the one hand, and other merely natural abilities and disabilities (such as wit and dullness), on the other, is merely verbal.

<sup>16</sup> On this point, see Watson 1996. Watson distinguishes between something's being ethically attributable to a person (for the purposes of what he calls eudaimonistic evaluation) and the person's being morally *accountable* for it in the sense of being liable to blame or moral sanction. Watson argues that accountability requires a form of control but attributability does not.

<sup>17</sup> Thus, Hume says that individuals "lay themselves under the restraint of such rules" (1978: 499) and that rules of justice are "immediately embraced" (1985b: 192). See Darwall 1995a: 284–318.

<sup>18</sup> Another possibility is that the trait of justice is not so much tied to a distinctive motive or reason of justice as to the useful habit of following the rules of justice. This fits better with Hume's text in various ways, but seems not to give us a distinctive motive of which to approve. I am indebted to Remy Debes for this suggestion.

accept it. But so much the worse, I'm inclined to think, for Hume's framework. The tensions are these: First, if someone accepts rules of justice as valid norms, then she will think she has normative reasons to do something simply because it would be unjust not to (or because it would violate the norm). But this means that the idea that the moral obligation to justice consists in an approval of the trait or motive of justice gets things backwards. The trait of justice of which we approve involves already taking justice as intrinsically obligating.19

Second, on Hume's official view, as we have seen, voluntary action seeks to bring about some good (Hume 1978: 439, also 399). This is a source of the contemporary "Humean" theory of motivation, according to which action always results from desires (which have some apparently good [desirable] state of the world as object). As we noted in the last chapter, however, normative acceptance is irreducibly attitude-of-asubject-regarding rather than state-of-the-world-regarding. In accepting a norm of justice requiring me to restore a seditious bigot's property, I take there to be a reason for doing so that cannot be reduced to a reason for (desiring) the existence of any state, even the state of the money's being returned. Perhaps the world would be a better place if the money went to Oxfam; that might be a more desirable state of affairs. And even if I think that a property-restoring act's being done is a better state, the reason I will credit in accepting a norm of justice requiring me to restore the property will differ from any deriving from (or consisting in) the value of that state. Imagine, again, that I can bring about more such valuable states by the shocking spectacle of violating the norm myself thereby causing, say, two other would-be violators not to go through with their previously intended violations. The (agent-relative, second-personal) reasons for acting that derive from a norm of property would not recommend that I do so. Reasons for action cannot, in general, be reduced to reasons to desire states, and, in particular, a reason of justice to return a seditious bigot's property cannot be. Or so someone who has the motive of justice must think if she is to regulate her conduct in the way she must for a whole plan or scheme to be collectively beneficial. But, again, this conflicts with Hume's general theory of motivation.

Finally, were Hume to accept the suggestion, it would open a yawning

<sup>19</sup> A similar "externalization" is involved in Mill's remark, quoted above, that the feeling of conscience is a motive to act rightly. As Mill himself notes, when we accept "customary morality" as a matter of conscience, a morally required action "presents itself to the mind with the feeling of being in itself obligatory" (1998: ch. 3, §1).

gap in his account of how the rules of justice are established. In Hume's story, individuals recognize that it is in their common interest if everyone follows the rules of justice, and they communicate this sense to one another. Suppose, however, that the rules of justice will be established in a sufficiently large society only if enough people actually accept the rules as binding norms. This will then support a desire in each individual that enough people so accept the rules. But this recognition and desire cannot itself directly motivate acceptance of the rules as valid norms of justice in any individual. It provides a reason of the wrong kind. Suppose that you are convinced that beneficial rules of justice will be established only if you accept the rules as valid norms of justice. You then have a reason of the right kind to want to be someone who accepts the rules as valid norms, but not yet a reason of the right kind actually to accept the norms as norms of justice. You cannot accept the norms for this reason.

This, again, is a consequence of Strawson's Point and another instance of the "wrong kind of reason" problem. I might want to be someone who believes that things are getting better in the world, but that fact and my reasons for wanting to be optimistic can't give me a reason of the right kind for thinking that the world isn't going to hell in a handbasket.20 Or I might want to be someone who isn't afraid of flying, but the reasons to which that desire responds do not speak to my fear. Similarly, I might think it would be better (and so want) to accept the rules of justice as norms of action. But to do that I must accept certain agent-relative, second-personal practical reasons. And I can't do that simply on the grounds that it would be better for me, or even for society, to do so.

### **Reid's Critique of Hume on Justice**

We come now to Reid's critique of Hume's conventionalist account of justice. Reid concedes that a "conception of the virtue of justice" is impossible until people "have lived some time in society," but he denies that this shows that justice is conventional, since reason itself depends on development and maturation within a social context (1969: 405). In any case, Reid argues, the sense of justice arises simultaneously with the capacity for moral judgment in general. And this sense already involves, moreover, the apprehension of "an obligation to justice, abstracting from the consideration of its utility" (406).

<sup>20</sup> Of course, it might motivate me to look for reasons of the right kind.

As evidence of these claims, Reid cites the fact that the concepts of *favor* and *injury* come with normal human (social) development, independently of Humean conventions, and that these concepts presuppose those of justice and injustice. The very idea of a favor is of an intentional benefit that goes beyond anything its beneficiary has the standing to expect or demand as her just due. And the notion of an injury is of a harm that violates a norm of justice.21 It is one thing to see ourselves as benefited or harmed by others, even intentionally, and another to regard another's act as a favor or injury. The latter only makes sense in relation to warranted expectations that Reid collects under the concept of justice. What justice requires and allows, as he puts it, "fills up the middle ground between these two" (1969: 410).

Reid explicitly connects these notions, moreover, to (second-personal) reactive attitudes: "A favour naturally produces gratitude. An injury done to ourselves produces resentment; and even when done to another, it produces indignation" (1969: 410).22 Before we have the concepts of favor

<sup>21</sup> Obviously, what Reid means by 'injury' is nothing physical or medical, but something that is appropriately resented, as in "Sir, you do me an injury."

<sup>22</sup> It is instructive to compare a passage from Hume's second *Enquiry:* "Were there a species of creatures, intermingled with men, which, though rational, were possessed of such inferior strength, both of body and mind, that they were incapable of all resistance, and could never, upon the highest provocation, make us feel the effects of their resentment; the necessary consequence, I think, is, that we should be bound, by the laws of humanity, to give gentle usage to these creatures, but should not, properly speaking, lie under any restraint of justice with regard to them, nor could they possess any right or property, exclusive of such arbitrary lords. Our intercourse with them could not be called society, which supposes a degree of equality; but absolute command on the one side, and servile obedience on the other. Whatever we covet, they must instantly resign: Our permission is the only tenure, by which they hold their possessions: Our compassion and kindness the only check, by which they curb our lawless will: And as no inconvenience ever results from the exercise of a power, so firmly established in nature, the restraints of justice and property, being totally *useless,* would never have place in so unequal a confederacy" (1985: 190). For justice to be in play, according to Hume, the parties must be sufficiently close in power to make abiding by its rules genuinely advantageous. This would not be so, he thinks, if our power were sufficiently great in relation to certain creatures that we could use them for our ends with impunity.

Hume's reference to resentment is notable, as Kate Abramson has pointed out to me. But it is important also that Hume takes its relevance not to be intrinsic (or even as evidence of injustice), but to be indirect via mutual advantage. Issues of justice arise only if creatures can make us "feel the effects of their resentment" in a way that makes it in our interest to establish conventions that establish obligations toward them.

Hume is here subject to the same kind of Strawsonian criticism that I have frequently

and injury, we can, of course, be pleased when we are benefited, especially so when it is intentional, and displeased when we are harmed. To have the concept of a favor or injury, however, we must have some notion of what we can warrantedly expect or demand from others. Favor and injury are thus second-personal concepts. They concern our standing to have expectations and make demands of one another and are connected to second-personal responses that presuppose this authority. As Strawson points out for negative reactive attitudes like resentment, "the making of the demand *is* the proneness to such attitudes," and, we might add, vice versa (1968: 92–93).23

Reid also anticipates Strawson's Point. To see something as an injury, Reid observes, it is necessary to "have the conception of justice, and perceive its obligation distinct from its utility" (1969: 406). Regarding something as required by justice "carries inseparably along with it, a perception of its moral obligation" (413). It is inconceivable, therefore, that the distinctive sentiments of justice could arise simply through a mutually advantageous convention.

### **Reid's Critique of Hume on Promises**

Among the most interesting of Reid's criticisms for our purposes are those he makes of Hume on the obligation to keep promises. Hume's account of promising is notoriously byzantine,24 and it would take us too far afield

<sup>23</sup> Note also the following passage from Reid: "He perceives that injury is done to himself, and that he has a right to redress. The natural principle of resentment is roused by the view of its proper object, and excites him to defend his right. Even the injurious person is conscious of his doing injury; he dreads a just retaliation; and if it be in the power of the injured person, he expects it as due and deserved" (1969: 416–417).

<sup>24</sup> Or, as Hume might have put it, "Romish," since he says that promising is "one of the most mysterious and incomprehensible operations that can possibly be imagin'd, and may even be compar'd to *transubstantiation,* or *holy orders,* where a certain form of words, along with a certain intention, changes entirely the nature of an external object, and even of a human creature" (Hume 1978: 524).

mentioned and specifically lodged against Bernard Williams in Chapter 5 (footnote 4). Like Williams, Hume wants to accommodate the category of justice (or rights, for Williams), but without the second-personal moral psychology necessary for us to be able to accept "reasons of the right kind" for challenging injustice. It is one thing, again, to think that it would be desirable, whether from anyone's individual point of view or from some common standpoint, to hold someone accountable for doing something, or even to think that a habit of doing so is desirable or even worthy or esteem, but quite another to think that the action is of a kind that warrants resentment along with the authority to demand forbearance. Like Williams, Hume only admits reasons for challenging injustice that are outside any we accept within the second-person standpoint when we hold another accountable. I am indebted here to discussion with Simon Blackburn.

to attempt to master all its intricacies. Suffice it to say that although Hume sensibly understands promising to involve the voluntary undertaking of an obligation ("the willing of that obligation, which arises from the promise"), his moral psychology and virtue ethics require that the obligation be understood via the moral sentiment's role in an individual's psychic economy (1978: 517). Against this, Reid points out that the ideas of promise and its resulting obligation are essentially social, they are *to* others, and, therefore, involve "social operations of the human mind"; in our terms, second-personal psychic mechanisms, must be involved. Neither, Reid argues, can the obligation to keep promises depend on the usefulness of a conventional social practice of promising, as Hume supposes is true of the moral obligation to justice generally, since children are capable of understanding, and naturally accept, the basic fairness and reciprocity involved in keeping faith long before they have any conception of its social utility (1969: 444).

Reid stresses throughout the necessity of a pre-conventional, second-personal form of reciprocal obligation that individuals must already implicitly recognize in order for them to come to have genuine conventional obligations at all. For this point, it doesn't much matter whether or not we reserve the words 'promise' and 'contract' for undertakings that require specific conventional contexts. If we do, then the point will still remain that we could not come to have the conventionally established obligations of promise and contract unless we were capable of the preconventional second-personal obligations that make conventional obligations generally possible in the first place. Suppose we reserve 'promise' for a conventionally defined obligation that is undertaken with tokens of 'promise' and its synonyms, and we reserve 'contract,' for those that require as context the law of contract. So defined, promise and contract will be essentially conventional, and whatever distinctive obligations they carry will depend in some way on their respective conventional contexts. They will depend, as Hume puts it, on a certain "form of words" and therefore on employing "symbols and signs instituted" by "the conventions of men" (1979: 522). However, if Reid is right, these will nonetheless

also depend on the possibility of voluntarily undertaking second-personal obligations that are not conventional. To anticipate, it must be possible for individuals to create binding conventions by a kind of agreement that is itself neither conventional (in the usual sense) nor simply a coordination of self-interested conditional intentions, as in Hume's boat-rowing example or in iterated Prisoner's Dilemma.

Reid faults Hume for failing to grasp promising's "social" or second-personal character. Commanding, testifying, requesting, bargaining, and promising are all irreducibly "social": "they cannot exist without being expressed by words or signs, and known to the other party." It is impossible, moreover, "to resolve" social operations "into any modification or composition of the solitary" (1969: 438). (This, we should note in passing, is a consequence of the circle of irreducibly second-personal concepts that we described in Chapter 1.25) It is consequently impossible to understand promising in terms of such "solitary" Humean mental acts as "willing an obligation" (understanding 'obligation' as Hume does) or as the expression of "a resolution of performing" the promised act (Hume 1978: 518, 517).

Additionally, even if the distinctive forms that contract and promise take in established practices depend on "human invention," these nonetheless presuppose a second-personal sociality that makes conventional practices possible in the first place. Reid makes a similar claim about language. No doubt much of language is conventional also, but without a background of natural, nonconventional dispositions to respond second-personally, conventional linguistic discourse would be impossible: "This intercourse, in its beginning at least, must be carried on by natural signs, whose meaning is understood by both parties, previous to all compact and agreement. . . . The power which man has of holding social intercourse with his kind, by asking and refusing, threatening and suppli-

<sup>25</sup> As Searle famously argued in "How to Derive an 'Ought' from an 'Is' " (1964), giving rise to an obligation to the promisee is part of the very idea of a promise. As we noted in Chapter 3, however, we can't really get an 'ought' from an 'is', Searle to the contrary notwithstanding. Either a genuine obligation follows from a promise, in which case whether someone actually promised is itself a normative rather than a factual question, or if it is a factual question, then the only thing that follows is a *de facto* authority to demand that it be kept, not the authority *de jure* that a genuinely normative obligation involves.

cating, commanding and obeying, testifying and promising," cannot be human invention, but must rather be a distinctive "part of our constitution, like the powers of seeing and hearing" (1969: 439).

Contemporary epistemological discussion has drawn from related Reidian claims about *testimony* (Burge 1993; Coady 1992; Foley 1994; Moran 2005).26 Reid argues that unless we are disposed to give others authority in theoretical reasoning by treating their testimony as providing reasons for belief that extend beyond any reasons others can themselves offer in support of what they say, our practices of reason-giving cannot get off the ground. This is a version of the point we noted from Pettit and Smith (1996) in Chapter 3. When we conduct serious "conversation of an intellectual kind," we must impute to one another a second-personal authority to give us reasons to believe things.27 Burge endorses an "acceptance principle" along what he presents as similar Reidian lines: "A person is entitled to accept as true something that is presented as true and that is intelligible to him, unless there are stronger reasons not to do so" (1993: 467).

Reid notes that "as soon as they are capable of understanding declarations," children "are led by their constitution to rely on them." And "they are no less led by constitution to veracity and candour, for their own part" (1969: 444). This rings true. Were children not naturally disposed to trust what they are told and to avow candidly their own beliefs, it is difficult to see how they could possibly be inducted into practices of theoretical reason-giving or even to learn a language. Of course, even if trust and veracity are natural defaults, that does not mean that this presumption cannot be defeated by a record of unreliable testimony. Indeed, it will be crucial to my argument later that second-personal theoretical authority is ultimately defeasible in this way and so different from the kind of authority we presuppose in addressing and acknowledging second-personal practical reasons. Nonetheless, even common inquiry must presuppose some presumptive (theoretical) authority.

Reid argues that the analogous points must hold also with practical trustworthiness. Fidelity must be the natural default in the practical realm no less than in the theoretical. Children naturally trust others' assurances

<sup>26</sup> I have been much helped by discussion with Edward S. Hinchman, and by Hinchman 2000.

<sup>27</sup> As we saw in Chapter 3, however, these reasons are defeasible third-personally.

about their future actions no less than what they say about other matters (Reid 1969: 444). It would be impossible, moreover, for us to make agreements, promises, and contracts, unless we already took ourselves to be accountable to one another and accorded each other the second-personal authority to undertake these distinctive obligations.28 Of course, violations of agreements or promises do not simply give the lie to declarations of future actions. They are distinct forms of injustice with their own characteristic remedies. If I agree or promise to do something, then I am obligated to make that happen in a way that I am not normally obligated to make what I assert true. I am obligated only to assert what is true, or what I believe to be true.

Again, it doesn't matter if we reserve 'promise' and 'contract' for distinctive conventionally defined methods of voluntarily undertaken second-personal obligations. Reid's point is that such conventional obligations will be possible only if we can presuppose an authority to make claims of one another and undertake voluntary obligations at all that does not itself depend upon antecedent conventions. We can hear in Reid's words echoes of Smith on exchange:

One boy has a top, another a scourge; says the first to the other, if you will lend me your scourge as long as I can keep up my top with it, you shall next have the top as long as you can keep it up. Agreed, says the other. This is a contract perfectly understood by both parties, though they never heard of the definition given by Ulpian or by Titius. And each of them knows, that he is injured if the other breaks the bargain, and that he does wrong if he breaks it himself. (Reid 1969: 437)29

What Reid calls "contract" here is the sort of agreement in the "everyday" sense that Margaret Gilbert (1990) argues gives rise to plural subjects. When two individuals agree in this way, it is then possible for them to do something together, in the first-person plural.

Reid and Gilbert insist that agreements of this sort result in voluntarily assumed obligations to one another. Once the agreement has been made,

<sup>28</sup> Compare Nietzsche's remark at the beginning of essay two of *On the Genealogy of Morals* (1994): "To breed an animal with the *right to make promises*—is not this the paradoxical task that nature has set itself in the case of man?"

<sup>29</sup> According to the *Oxford English Dictionary,* a scourge was a whip or a lash used to spin a top. Ulpian was a third-century Roman jurist, and Titius evidently appears in an example of restoring property in Blackstone's *Commentaries.*

each is obligated to do his part, unless released by the other.30 These obligations are thus second-personal. People who have made an agreement are obligated to one another not just in the sense that they have an obligation with respect to each other but in the further sense that they are accountable to each other. Failure to discharge the obligation gives the other grounds for second-personal reactive attitudes, such as resentment, and perhaps grounds for redress of some kind. Presently, we consider how it is possible for such second-personal obligations to arise voluntarily. Before we do so, however, we should note that if it is possible for obligations of justice to arise in this way, that would close the gap in Hume's account.

Hume says, recall, that individuals who lack conventions of justice can bring them into existence by communicating their common interest in regulating their conduct by its rules: "I observe, that it will be for my interest to leave another in the possession of his goods, *provided* he will act in the same manner with regard to me." When this is "mutually express'd" and common knowledge, "it produces a suitable resolution and behavior" (1978: 490). This may be enough to start a convention when numbers are sufficiently small, but it will be ineffective, again, when numbers grow larger. There is a point beyond which expressions of common interest will be insufficient to establish or sustain any convention to regulate by rules of justice, because, as we've seen, following the rules in individual cases will no longer invariably promote, or be seen to promote, individual and public interest.

If, however, the individuals could make an agreement in the "everyday" sense to follow the rules of property, promise, and contract, they could establish these rules by convention. To do so, each would not simply tell the other that it will serve his interests to follow the rules if others do. Rather, like the two boys in Reid's example or like Smithian barterers, one might propose that she follow the rules on the condition that others do so also, and others might accept this proposal. Assuming it possible to obligate themselves by a voluntary agreement in this way, all would then be obligated to one another to treat the rules as authoritative. The specific rules of property, promise, and contract would then be established by "a convention or agreement" that is "not in the nature of a promise"

<sup>30</sup> For interesting differences between agreements in this "everyday" sense, and mutually exchanged promises, see Gilbert 1996a.

(reserving 'promise' as Hume does for distinctive forms of second-personal assurance that involve "symbols and signs instituted" by "the conventions of men").31 But neither would it be the sort of coordinated prudential conditional intentions that Hume calls "convention." Rather, the agreement would be of the "everyday" kind that does not itself presuppose antecedently agreed rules.

### **Gilbert on Agreement and Obligation**

Of course, Hume was not prepared to take the possibility of everyday agreement for granted. So why should we? How, indeed, is it possible for individuals to obligate themselves to one another by an agreement? I believe that the answer is to be found in the presuppositions of second-personal engagement in general. Whenever someone addresses a second-personal reason of any kind, including just proposing an offered agreement for another's consideration (which itself involves the implicit address of a reason to consider), he presupposes that the other has the second-personal standing of a free and rational agent. He commits himself, as I argue in Chapter 10, to the equal dignity of persons, that is, to their common authority to make claims and demands of one another as mutually accountable equals. Even if each cannot be specially obligated to the other in the ways specified by the terms of their agreement until the agreement has actually been made, it is a presupposition of their mutual address that they are already obligated to one another in general as free and equal rational persons.32

Recall the experiments we considered in the last chapter in which subjects play Prisoner's Dilemma after a conversation about whether or not to cooperate. In one setup, individuals showed a significantly enhanced ability to predict their interlocutors' plays (Frank 1988). In another, the

<sup>31</sup> Of course, this might still not be effective. My point is simply that if the parties took one another to have second-personal competence and authority, it would be possible for the conventions to become thus established. Unlike Hume's story, the parties could regard one another as having (and regarding themselves as having) reasons (of the right kind) to comply.

<sup>32</sup> This is a consequence of the instance of Strawson's Point we called "Cudworth's Point" (see Chapter 5 above). Just as God cannot obligate us by his commands without it already being the case that he has second-personal authority with respect to us, so also would it be impossible for two individuals to obligate themselves especially to one another by an agreement unless they already had the second-personal standing so to obligate one another in this way. Again: "Second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in." amount of cooperation roughly doubled (Orbell, Dawes, and van de Kragt 1988, 1990). I speculated that we could explain these results if we notice the role of second-personal recognition in the experimental setup. The distinctive ability to determine another's sincerity in conversation about whether to cooperate involves, I claimed, sensitivity to reciprocal respect. Suppose someone tells you he will cooperate. Is he telling the truth? Is he really willing to do the collectively beneficial thing so long as you do? Or does he just want you to believe that he is? Well, if you are discussing whether to cooperate, the question really becomes, Is this a serious conversation? Is he discussing this question in earnest and giving you a second-personal authority, or is he simply going to decide what to believe and do unilaterally? If the latter, then not only will there be nothing reciprocal about his choice, but also there will be nothing genuinely reciprocal about the conversation; it will not be serious. He will have no particular need to determine what you are going to do, say, by listening carefully, because his choice will be unilateral. If he is an egoistic noncooperator, he will not cooperate whatever you say or do. He has nothing at stake in the conversation and need give you no authority in it, either to answer the theoretical question of what (to believe) you will do, or to answer the practical question of what to do himself. No genuine codeliberation, either theoretical or practical, will occur.33 I speculated that part of normal human social development involves the capacity to detect the presence or absence of reciprocal attention and, hence, of serious engagement.

Similarly, experimenters note that, in the second setup, which showed substantially increased cooperation, conversations about what to do frequently proceeded in the first-person plural, with subjects deliberating about what they ("we") would do collectively. This suggests that, in some cases at least, a genuine co-deliberation was going on that ended in an agreement to cooperate "together" in Gilbert's sense. If Gilbert is right, however, these conversations must have had a serious second-personal aspect. Two individuals can agree to do something together in Gilbert's sense only through interactions that are at least implicitly second-personal.34 For the decision to cooperate to constitute a Gilbertian agreement, there must be both invitation and uptake, if only implicitly (Gilbert

<sup>33</sup> I take this helpful term from Scanlon 1998: 268.

<sup>34</sup> Note, however, that it seems to be possible for individuals to share intentions, if not to agree in the everyday sense, without the full satisfaction of Gilbert's conditions. On this see, Bratman 1992 and 1993.

1990: 6–8). It would hardly be surprising that this would increase cooperation, since, as Gilbert points out, the cooperators would have appropriately felt some obligation to one another to comply with their agreement. The (second-personal) reasons to comply that any such obligation involves find no adequate representation in rational self-interest models, but according to those models, increased cooperation should not have occurred anyway. Even after serious conversation, the dominant selfinterested strategy is not to cooperate.

I believe that the capacity of individuals to make agreements and form plural subjects depends upon their already presupposing one another's second-personal standing in seriously addressing each other in the first place. So any resulting obligation depends both on what they presuppose, namely, that they both have the requisite authority, and on their addressing one another on terms that presuppose this. It is the terms of this standing as mutually accountable persons in general that then gives them the authority to obligate themselves especially to one another through the terms of their agreement.35

The standing to make and be obligated by agreements at all is a second-personal authority that entails mutual accountability. This, again, is a consequence of Cudworth's Point (which is itself a version of Strawson's). Just as God cannot create by command the second-personal authority necessary to give his commands normative force, so also is it impossible for obligations to come from agreements all the way down. Unless you and I already have the authority to bind ourselves by an agreement, as we presuppose when we address one another, we cannot create a resulting obligation. Before you and I consummate an agreement to do something together, then, we are already obligated to one another as equal free and rational persons (as we presuppose in any serious conversation about whether to agree), although not yet specially obligated as we would be

<sup>35</sup> Gilbert (1996b) maintains that parties to an agreement are obligated to comply even if the agreement is coerced. She grants that there may be no moral obligation to keep coerced agreements, but holds that there is an obligation that creates a normative reason for acting nonetheless. But if, as I believe, the parties to an agreement presuppose that they have an equal dignity as free and equal persons in addressing one another second-personally at all, then it is hard to see how this can be so. Any second-personal reasons for acting that agreements normally give rise to would seem to be defeated if the agreement is coerced. Of course, there might be other reasons for keeping a coerced agreement, such as self-interest. But without a second-personal reason, there can be no obligation to keep the agreement.

by a consummated agreement. The second obligation cannot be created without the existence already of the first. Again we see: "Second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in."

So far, this may seem just to get the parties into the space of the reasonable and mutual accountability. Their (presupposed) common second-personal authority is sufficient for that and necessary for them to bind themselves by an agreement. But it may seem that it is nonetheless not sufficient for a binding agreement. However, some demand of good faith has to be built into the very idea of second-personal authority, since that concerns address by its very nature.36 The very existence of the category depends on there being a distinction between serious representations or undertakings, on the one hand, and those that are not, on the other. But for that distinction to be maintained, individuals must be accountable to one another for the seriousness of their representations and undertakings; they must have a claim against one another that they not present themselves as making serious representations and undertakings when they are not (with, of course, the usual escape clauses about play, humor, irony, and so on). So if two parties present themselves as having a serious conversation about whether to agree to something and then agree, then both have a resulting claim that the agreement be kept. Both already had a claim that any address on the matter of whether to agree be in good faith. And since it is a presupposition of a serious conversation about whether to agree that the parties will be bound if they agree, then some claim actually to keep the agreement must follow also from their common authority to demand good faith.

### **Scanlon on Promising**

Another contemporary resonance of these and related points can be found in Scanlon's recent writings on the obligation to keep promises. As against the Humean claim that there is no obligation of promise-keeping outside of an established practice, Scanlon defends the Reidian thesis that promissory obligations do not require conventions (1990, 1998: 295–327). Scanlon's account may not, however, be sufficiently sensitive to the second-personal aspects of promising that Reid emphasizes.

<sup>36</sup> Along similar lines, one might say that a warranted demand for honest dealing is built into the very idea of relating accountably to others.

Scanlon's explicit target is Rawls's view that the obligation to keep promises is an instance of the general requirement to do one's fair share in mutually advantageous practices (Rawls 1971: 344–350). He presents cases where there is no ongoing practice of promise-keeping and argues that it is possible in such cases for people to undertake to give one another assurances of future conduct that create obligations of fidelity, whether or not we choose to call such extra-conventional acts "promises." Scanlon's basic line of argument strikes me as largely successful, although less than it might be were it to be more sensitive to the second-personal character of promising, namely, that promises are forms of address that presuppose a second-personal authority of promiser and promisee.37

Scanlon's argument depends on the claim that it would be unreasonable to reject *Principle F:*38

If (1) in the absence of objectionable constraint, and with adequate understanding (or the ability to acquire such understanding) of his or her situation, *A* intentionally leads *B* to expect that *A* will do *X* unless *B* consents to *A*'s not doing so; (2) *A* knows that *B* wants to be assured of this; (3) *A* acts with the aim of providing this assurance, and has good reason to believe that he or she has done so; (4) *B* knows that *A* has the beliefs and intentions just described; (5) *A* intends for *B* to know this, and knows that *B* does know it; and (6) *B* knows that *A* has this knowledge and intent; then, in the absence of special justification, *A* must do *X* unless *B* consents to *X*'s not being done. (245)

We may stipulate that these conditions are all satisfied in standard promises. Scanlon's claim is then that the wrongness of breaking promises is to be explained by the wrongness of violating Principle *F*. Unless, however, we interpret the idea of "providing assurance" in a second-personal way that already presupposes the authority of the assured to claim compliance, or assume, at least, that assurer and assured present themselves to one another as presupposing this in common, I doubt that this is so.

Consider, first, cases where one intentionally or negligently causes someone to expect that one will do something. Scanlon argues persuasively that in such cases the person whom one has led to have the ex-

<sup>37</sup> In what follows, I draw on Darwall (2006).

<sup>38</sup> I refer to Scanlon's presentation (2003). A very similar account is provided in 1998: 295–317.

pectation acquires a claim on one. If she has not yet relied on the expectation, then she has a claim to one's correcting the expectation if it is mistaken. And if she has relied on it, then she has some claim to compensation. But if she has not relied on the expectation, she has no claim that one fulfill the expectation, only that one correct any mistake in it. Promises are, of course, different. If one promises to do something and the other hasn't yet relied on an expectation that one will do it, one cannot simply disabuse her of the expectation if one wishes not to do what one promised. The other has a remaining valid claim to one's doing what one promised and not just to due notice of nonperformance or to compensation in the case of reliance.

Principle *F* attempts to capture this through a complex set of conditions connected to providing assurance. But this idea can be interpreted in two different ways. A *causal* interpretation of providing assurance would be: causing someone to be assured that something will happen, say, that one will do something. On a *second-personal* interpretation, however, providing assurance would involve an act of *assuring,* that is, a putatively claim-giving address to another of the same species as promise (maybe the very same thing as a promise).

Scanlon could avail himself of a second-personal interpretation of providing assurance without rendering Principle *F* idle. We know from the literature generated by Searle (1964) that it is one thing to show that the idea of promise cannot be understood except in terms of putative undertakings of obligation and another to establish that a genuinely binding obligation is created in fact.39 However, if we interpret providing assurance in causal terms, Principle *F* is not compelling.

To show this, we have to imagine a fairly elaborate case in which all of the conditions in *F* are satisfied. Suppose you want me to attend your party. If I were to promise to do so, then I would give you by that distinctive form of second-personal address a claim to my doing so; you would warrantedly expect this *of* me, and not just justifiably expect that I would do so. But suppose, first, that I simply intentionally cause you to expect that I will do so, say, by telling your friends that I will. In that case, if you have not relied on that expectation, I can discharge any claim you have of me by simply telling you in a timely fashion, before you rely on the expectation, that I am actually not going to come, if that is my

<sup>39</sup> See, for example, Hare 1967.

intention. But again, that is not so if I promise or assure you that I will come. In that case, you will have a claim that cannot be discharged by telling you of my real intentions should I decide not to come, even if you have not yet relied on the expectation that I will come. But what if Principle *F* is satisfied with the various assurance conditions being interpreted in causal terms?

Suppose it is common knowledge between you and me that you have access to my email and that you check it regularly. (Let's not worry about why *that* would be!) On Monday, I send an email to a friend saying that I firmly intend to go to the party unless you wish me not to (the consent dimension of clause (1)), but that I will not promise or assure you myself, since I desire that, *were* I, counterfactually, to change my intention, you would have no remaining claim to my coming to the party. My complex desire for this extremely unlikely counterfactual situation notwithstanding, my firm intention is still to come to the party unless you wish otherwise. This satisfies clause (1). Since I know that you want to be assured that I will come unless you wish otherwise, (2) is satisfied. I send the message in order to cause you to be assured, and since I know you will read the message and, let us assume, believe it, I have good reason to believe that you will be thus assured. You believe of course that *were* I to change my mind I would not regard you as having any claim to my coming (therefore, that I am not *assuring you,* second-personally, that I will come), but you also believe that the probability that I will change my mind is negligible, so (3) is satisfied.

Suppose, then, that on Tuesday, I send a second email to my friend saying that because you have likely read and believed my first email, as I had hoped, you are therefore likely now to be assured that I will come to the party unless you wish me not to. Since you read this second message, you come thereby to know that I wrote the first message with the aim of causing you to be thus assured and that I believe you have been, so (4) is satisfied. Since I wrote the second message with the intention that you would read and believe it, and I know that you will read it, condition (5) is satisfied.

Suppose, then, that on Wednesday, I send a third email to my friend saying that because you have likely read and believed my second email, as I had hoped, you must now know that I had written the first with the intention of causing you to be assured and that I know that you have been. You read my third email, so you now know that I had this knowledge and intent; so condition (6) is satisfied.

Suppose now that I *do* change my mind and decide not to go to your party *and* that you have in no way yet relied on the expectation that I will go. You have, of course, a claim that I notify you of this in a timely fashion before you rely on it. But do you have a claim to my actually going unless you consent to my not going? It seems that you do not. After all, although I intentionally created in you the expectation that I would go, because I had a firm intention to do so, I also intentionally created in you the expectation that in the utterly unlikely instance that I were to change my mind, I would not in fact come nor regard you as having any claim to my coming. In the relevant respects, therefore, this seems to be like a case in which I intentionally create an expectation and in which you have a claim to compensation if you rely and to timely notice of my real intentions if I come to change them, but not to my actually doing what you had been led to expect if you have not yet relied on that expectation and if I have given you timely notice of my changed intention.

Even though conditions (1) through (6) are satisfied, then, it nonetheless seems that, if I have informed you otherwise and you haven't relied, you have no remaining claim to my actually coming to your party. I conclude that there is a case where it would not be wrong to violate Principle *F* on a causal interpretation. And although I have not directly argued that Principle *F,* interpreted causally, is one someone could reasonably reject, I hope it is reasonably clear that whether that is so or not, it's not being so would not explain why it is wrong to violate promises.

Promises have an essentially second-personal character that Principle *F* cannot capture when it is interpreted in causal terms. It is part of the very idea of a promise or an assurance that the addresser gives the addressee to understand that she thereby has a claim to the addresser's following through. Moreover, when I promise or assure someone that I will do something, I must already be authorizing the other to presuppose that she and I share a second-personal authority to make claims of, and be accountable to, one another. In this last section, I have been arguing that Principle *F* is impotent to explain the wrongness of breaking promises unless we interpret it in second-personal terms.

The lesson, I believe, is that the obligations of promise-keeping have an essentially second-personal character that cannot be fully accounted for outside the second-person standpoint. There is no way to construct the distinctive claims and authority over ourselves that we can give to another by a second-personal assurance out of non-second-personal materials, for example, by reckoning benefits and harms our actions have caused and obligations that derive from these. Here again, "second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in."40

The need to explain the distinctive forms of accountability involved in promising gives us a glimpse of a point discussed in Chapter 12. A contractualist theory of moral obligation, like Scanlon's, must seek to link norms that no one can reasonably reject to mutual accountability in the right way. Justification to one another as mutually accountable equals is a fundamental idea in the contractualist framework. But what commits us to this idea? Not all rational justification is to others in the way that the mutual accountability of contractualist morality requires. Rational thought is frequently and appropriately solitary rather than social, in Reid's sense. It is true that most human beings have a desire to be able to justify themselves to one another, at least in certain areas of their lives (Scanlon 1982). And it is true also that mutual accountability is an ineliminable aspect of relations, like friendship, that most of us value highly (1998: 148–168). But as important as these facts are, they give us reasons of the wrong kind for thinking that we actually are accountable to one another in the way contractualism supposes. They ground no authority to make claims and demands of one another. This, again, is Strawson's Point. In Chapter 12, I argue that contractualism cannot have the foundations it requires, therefore, unless it is grounded in the second-person standpoint. Second-personal practical reasoning involves justification to by its very nature.

In Part IV, we turn to the constructive arguments with which such a foundation must be built. What I hope to have established by this point,

<sup>40</sup> Judith Thomson argues that the capacity of promises to obligate requires no special explanation: "There is nothing deeper that needs to be or can be said about how wordgivings generally and promisings in particular generate claims. Their moral force lies in their generating claims; and the fact that they do generate claims is explained by the fact that issuing an invitation is offering to bind oneself, so that when the invitation is accepted, the offer is accepted, and one therefore *is* bound" (1990: 303). But this explanation seems already to assume the (second-personal) authority to bind and be bound by accepted invitations; without that, even if we assume that an offer to bind oneself to another is an invitation and that if other accepts this invitation, she will have accepted one's being bound to her, it is unclear why one couldn't simply cancel that by taking it back (as one could not if there were a genuine obligation, as there would be if one and she had the relevant second-personal authorities to be bound and to bind in the first place). I am indebted to Gary Watson for this passage from Thomson. (See Watson unpublished.)

and in these last two chapters in particular, is that the second-personal concepts these arguments will employ have a firm footing in human psychology as well as in powerful moral ideas and arguments. In what remains, I attempt to show that second-personal authority is not just an essential element of deeply held moral ideas and feelings. It is also something we presuppose whenever we take up a second-person perspective to address claims or demands of any kind at all. And, the second-person standpoint is a central element of practical reason *überhaupt.*

