---
title: "The Force of Subsistence Rights"
author:
  - name: "Charles R. Beitz"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "535–554"
citation_key: "beitz2015subsistence"
---

## <span id="page-549-0"></span> [The Force of Subsistence Rights](#page-8-16)

*Charles R. Beitz*

Elizabeth Ashford observes that those whose access to the means of subsistence is under continuous and unavoidable threat are in a situation of existential vulnerability: they can be induced by offers of subsistence to put other urgent interests in jeopardy.1 This is because, in circumstances of extreme deprivation, it may be rational to trade away most any other interest in order to gain access to the means of subsistence. Ashford notes that such bargains ("subsistence exchange contracts") are not esoteric: child labor, sweatshop labor, and human smuggling are instances. Although we might hesitate to classify the offer of such a bargain as a form of coercion, it has two features in common with ordinary coercion: its acceptance is in a certain sense non-voluntary (because the alternative is unsustainable) and the consequences are likely to be harmful to the vulnerable party. At the same time, the offer and acceptance of such a bargain differs from ordinary coercion in the important respect that it leaves the vulnerable party better off, all-things-considered, than her condition ex ante, notwithstanding the harm done.

Ashford argues for two conclusions, both of which draw on the analysis of the subsistence exchange relationship. First, the position of those who would prohibit subsistence exchange contracts in order to protect the vulnerable from harm is insupportable. Banning these contracts would in fact make the vulnerable worse off overall by denying them an option they have reason to want. Those who favor doing so should also support social guarantees of access to the means of subsistence in order to eliminate the vulnerability that makes subsistence exchange contracts advantageous. Second, the position of those who accept that there is a human right against coercive interference with individual liberty and security ("libertarians," in her terms)2 yet dispute that there is a right to the means of subsistence is also unsupportable. The prospect of subsistence exchange contracts shows that persistent deprivation of access to the means of subsistence is an obstacle to enjoyment of the substance of the right against coercive interference with liberty and security. Those who hold that there is a human right to protection of liberty and security should accept that there is also a human right of access to the means of subsistence.

This is a severely compressed précis of a complex analysis. One of its aims is to vindicate Henry Shue's well-known argument for "basic rights" against an objection to

<sup>1</sup> Elizabeth Ashford, "A Moral Inconsistency Argument for a Basic Human Right to Subsistence," this volume, ch. 29.

<sup>2</sup> She understands this position as characterized by the view that only "negative" rights (rights against interference) are genuine human rights. Ashford, this volume, ch. 29, 515.

which it is sometimes thought susceptible. Shue conceives of a moral right as the basis of a claim that enjoyment of the substance of the right be socially guaranteed against predictable ("standard") threats. He argues that if there are any moral rights at all, then there must be "basic" rights to security and subsistence, because without such rights there could be no secure expectation of enjoyment of the substance of whichever other rights we suppose people to have.3 Some have objected, however, that this argument trades on an esoteric conception of a right (or perhaps of "enjoyment" of a right). They hold that as rights are ordinarily understood, there are some rights that can be enjoyed even if security or subsistence are not guaranteed. It does not seem a stretch, for example, to say that there could be an effective right against torture if social institutions were to prohibit torture and enforce the prohibition, even if there were no effective guarantee of subsistence. But if this is correct, then there is no "basic right" to subsistence, because a guarantee of access to the means of subsistence is not necessary to guarantee enjoyment of the substance of all other rights.

Ashford's analysis of subsistence exchange contracts is a response to this objection. The strategy of the response is to enlist a "libertarian" commitment to protection of interests in liberty and security in the service of protection of subsistence interests. She takes the former commitment as given and holds that, because severe poverty is a standing invitation to the kind of exploitation manifested by subsistence exchange contracts, the protection of subsistence interests is necessary for the protection of liberty and security interests. In this way she seeks to avoid the appeal to "positive" duties that evokes the libertarian challenge. I am not sure that libertarians will be satisfied—much depends on whether they agree that acceptance of a subsistence exchange contract is nonvoluntary in a morally significant way. However, I shall not try to formulate the libertarian rejoinder. I am interested instead in a form of skepticism about subsistence rights that might survive even if the essentials of the argument against the libertarian were granted. It arises when we take the perspective of those who may be called upon to contribute to the relief of deprivations of the means of subsistence rather than that of those who suffer the deprivations. Skepticism is at its sharpest when we assume the perspective of potential contributors beyond the boundaries of the society in which the deprivations occur. I shall rehearse the skeptical view and discuss what might be said in response to it, relying in part on arguments I have made before.4 This moves beyond the central concern of Ashford's paper, but I believe the view set forth here is complementary.

### **I. Skeptical Doubts**

I begin with a preliminary comment about the subject-matter of human rights. Shue takes "basic rights" to be a species of moral rights. But there is no mistaking that his book aims to contribute to discourse about *human* rights understood roughly as they

<sup>3</sup> Henry Shue, *Basic Rights*, 2nd edn. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), ch. 1. Ashford's idea of a subsistence exchange contract elaborates Shue's idea of a "torture contract" (Shue, *Basic Rights*, 185).

<sup>4</sup> Charles R. Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights* ((New York: Oxford University Press, 2009) (hereinafter *IHR*), particularly sections 18 and 25).

are within the international practice that originated after the Second World War with the framing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). At the time Shue wrote, most philosophers tended to regard the rights catalogued in the international documents as moral rights of a more-or-less ordinary kind—that is, individual claim-rights to which correlative duties are attached. This identification has caused trouble in the discourse of the international practice, in which human rights are usually presented as standards for institutions whose implications for the conduct of individual and collective agents can be uncertain.5 One of the important contributions of Shue's book was to concentrate attention on the variety of duties that might plausibly be thought to attach to basic (and other) rights. But the question whether it is best to interpret international human rights as a species of individual moral rights as familiarly understood rather than as a *sui generis* class of norms was left unexplored. As a result, it may be ambiguous what practical conclusions would follow for various types of agents from our agreeing that the right to subsistence should be "universally fulfilled."6

The skeptical view arises from pressing on this ambiguity. Because human rights present themselves as grounds of claims, reflection about their basis is naturally directed towards the interests of potential claim-makers—that is, the beneficiaries of these rights. As Ashford's analysis of the similarities and differences of rights to security and to subsistence illustrates, when we think about the significance of these rights for their beneficiaries, it can seem incontrovertible that enjoyment of the substance of the rights is of great urgency—perhaps even a condition of living any kind of decent life. But the satisfaction7 of these rights will normally impose burdens on other agents—as we might say, on contributors as distinct from beneficiaries. The skeptical view proceeds from the perspective of potential contributors and denies that recognition of the significance of the rights in question for their beneficiaries is enough, by itself, to explain why potential contributors should regard themselves as under an obligation to contribute to their satisfaction.

My aim is not to persuade anyone that the skeptical view is finally persuasive so I will not develop it in detail. I imagine the view only to call attention to the independent importance of considering subsistence rights from the perspective of potential contributors both within and beyond the society in which enjoyment of the substance of the rights might be threatened. As I imagine it, the skeptical view draws on two kinds of doubt to which an explanation of the responsibilities of potential contributors should respond. One is conceptual. It holds that, for any authentic human right, there should be a criterion or process for assigning responsibilities to potential contributors such that, if these responsibilities were to be carried out, the right would be satisfied for everyone. The skeptic argues that, for subsistence rights, there is no feasible

<sup>5</sup> For discussion see Thomas Pogge, *World Poverty and Human Rights*, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Polity, 2008), 64–9.

<sup>6</sup> Ashford, this volume, ch. 29, 534. I mean this as an observation, not a criticism. Shue considers the institutional aspect of basic rights in the Afterword to the 1996 edition of *Basic Rights*, 153–80.

<sup>7</sup> "Satisfaction" is an awkward term, though it seems to be common in the discourse of human rights.

assignment of responsibilities under which this would be the case. The other skeptical doubt is normative and, although easily conflated with the first, is distinct from it. This second doubt holds that the demands for action associated with subsistence rights, taken in aggregate, require unreasonably much of those on whom these rights profess to impose responsibilities to act. In contrast to the first source of doubt, the claim is not that there is no practicable assignment of responsibilities that would result in the satisfaction of the right for all. Instead, the position is that the burdens imposed by any assignment of responsibilities would be greater than their assignees might reasonably be expected to bear. To put it differently and perhaps more clearly, the second doubt is that, however the responsibilities are assigned, their assignees would not, in general, have sufficient reason to act on them.

I believe that both of these doubts miss their target. They gain their grip by invoking an idea of human rights as a species of moral claim-right of the kind that holds between individual persons. This idea does not register the fact that human rights, as we find them in international doctrine, are in the first instance conditions for institutions rather than for individual persons taken seriatim. And it misses the significance of the fact that international human rights constitute a global practice in which human rights claims serve distinctive political purposes. Once we understand the role played by claims of right within this public practice, we can see that the doubts I have mentioned are not in any straightforward way grounds for skepticism that subsistence rights have normative force. And we shall be better able to appreciate the reasons for action available to those in a position to act in favor of satisfying these rights.8

### **II. Human Rights in the Global Practice**

If I were to say that there is a human right to do or to have something, what, exactly, would I be saying? There are several ways to answer this question. A common approach among philosophers is to adopt a conception of a right from some other context and to interpret the notion of a human right in light of this adopted conception. One might, for example, look to the history of thought about "natural" or "fundamental" rights in the hope of finding a model to which the idea of a human right could be assimilated. Alternatively, we might look to the practice itself and try to work up a conception of human rights from the role the idea plays within it.

In *The Idea of Human Rights* I argue that we should resist the first approach in favor of the second.9 If our interest in human rights is motivated by a desire to make sense of the existing international practice, then it is hard to resist the thought that we should frame a conception of the idea of a human right by looking to the way the idea is understood by competent participants in the practice. Roughly the picture is this. We have on hand an international doctrine whose authoritative statements include subsistence rights. We are confronted with skeptical claims holding that the inclusion

<sup>8</sup> I discussed subsistence rights within the practice in an earlier paper ("Human Rights and *The Law of Peoples*," in Deen Chatterjee (ed.), *The Ethics of Assistance: Morality and the Distant Needy* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 193–214). Here and in *IHR* I characterize the practice differently and advance a different view about the force of these rights.

<sup>9</sup> See *IHR*, chs. 3 and 5.

of these rights in international human rights doctrine is the result of a conceptual or a normative error. To decide if we should agree with the skeptical claims, we need a grasp of the idea of a human right as it is found in international doctrine and in the public practice in which it is embedded.

To say this, of course, is to suppose that there is such a thing as an international practice of human rights. I doubt that readers of this volume will need to be persuaded that this is true, but it is worth saying quickly what I mean by it. The practice of human rights is normative and discursive. It consists of a series of norms for the regulation of behavior together with various forms of legal and political action for which the norms are taken by participants in the practice to provide reasons. People appeal to these norms to justify claims on various agents and to appraise their conduct. This practice has developed on several fronts since the end of the Second World War, when its doctrinal foundations were laid in the UDHR and subsequently in two international covenants and various other international agreements. It has grown since the Helsinki Accords of 1975 and the end of the Cold War around 1990. We see elements of the practice expressed in international law, in the monitoring and reporting activities of global and regional institutions devoted to human rights, in the policies of other international organizations, in the conduct of foreign policy by states, and in the activities of a diverse assortment of non-governmental organizations. Notwithstanding its evolved complexity, we must regard the practice as emergent, because it lacks important features found in more mature normative practices. For example, levels of compliance are uneven and the practice lacks authoritative institutions for interpreting and enforcing its norms.

We arrive at a "practical" conception of human rights by exploring the role played by the idea of a human right in the discourse of this practice. Human rights claims are supposed to provide reasons to a range of agents for various kinds of political action. In order to understand the concept of a human right as it operates within the practice we ask for what kinds of actions, by which kinds of agents, and in which kinds of circumstances human rights claims are typically understood to give reasons.

The working out of a practical conception of human rights would therefore require an analysis of the history of the contemporary human rights system and of its political dynamics. Since I cannot do this here,10 I will simply stipulate what I call a "two-level model" that I believe describes the idea of a human right as we find it in the practice today. Like any model, this is both an idealization and a simplification but I believe the main elements are observable in the contemporary legal and political culture of human rights (though I would not claim that the model accommodates all of the uses of the idea of human rights found in contemporary practice).

The two-level model expresses a division of labor between states as the bearers of the primary responsibilities to respect and protect human rights and agents of the international community as bearers of responsibilities to act when states default. There are three main elements.11

<sup>10</sup> I have tried to do it, briefly, in *IHR*, ch. 2.

<sup>11</sup> For the main ideas I am indebted to Shue, *Basic Rights*, ch. 1 and the 1996 Afterword, and James W. Nickel, *Making Sense of Human Rights*, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2006), chs. 1–4. For more detail about the two-level model see *IHR*, ch. 5.

First: Human rights are requirements whose object is to protect urgent individual interests against predictable threats to which they are vulnerable under the general circumstances of life typical in what we might roughly describe as the modern world. They cannot plausibly be regarded as pertaining to all times and places.

Second: Human rights apply in the first instance to the political institutions of states, including their constitutions, laws, and public policies. Each state is responsible for protecting the human rights of its citizens and others residing in its territory. The nature of the protection called for will vary with the content of the right and the social and political context, but as a general matter, human rights may impose at least three kinds of requirements on states and their agents: to respect the underlying interests in its laws and policies, to protect these interests against threats from other agents, and to help those who are non-voluntarily victims of deprivation.12

Third: A state's failure to protect the human rights of its members may be a source of reasons for action for agents outside the state. Human rights are distinctively matters of international concern. The international community has a general responsibility to hold states accountable for respecting their people's human rights and to act when states fail egregiously to do so. Moreover, states and non-state agents with the means to act effectively have pro tanto reasons to assist an individual state to satisfy human rights standards in cases in which the state itself lacks the capacity to do so. These importantly include reasons to remove externally imposed conditions that obstruct or undermine the state's capacity to act.

For the most part I will have to leave the elaboration and defense of this model to my readers' imaginations, but let me call attention to four features that have special relevance for subsistence rights. The first involves the idea of a violation of human rights, which we must understand more broadly than we would if we were to think of human rights as individual moral claim-rights. Human rights, in the first instance, are requirements for institutions. As I have observed, they may impose several types of requirement (both "negative" and "positive"). A "violation" may be said to occur when a protected interest is set back as a result of a government's failure to satisfy these requirements, whether through lack of capacity or of will. This means that a government might be said to have violated a human right even when there is no intention to do so (for example, through a lack of capacity or poor policy planning) and when the proximate cause of the deprivation is something other than government action (for example, when a government fails to take the appropriate preventative or remedial steps). This clearly stretches the ordinary idea of a "violation" but it seems to me to be faithful to the discourse.

Second, according to the model, human rights violations are reason-giving for external agents. A state's default on its responsibility to protect the human rights of its people supplies pro tanto reasons for outside agents to act. Pro tanto reasons, of course, are not necessarily conclusory. However, as we shall see in the case of subsistence rights, the reasons for action facing external agents are often likely to be weighty. In some cases (for example, when what is required is the removal of an obstructing

<sup>12</sup> This typology of duties is due to Shue. As he observes, these combine what are conventionally classified as "negative" and "positive" requirements. *Basic Rights*, ch. 3.

condition) a failure to accord them due weight and to act appropriately might itself be considered a form of violation.

Third, in contemporary international practice human rights violations supply reasons for many kinds of international or transnational political action. It is natural to think of military intervention as the paradigm, but this is artificially narrow.13 The array of means available to states to promote and protect human rights in other states also includes nonviolent forms of coercive interference (for example, economic sanctions), the imposition of conditions on participation in international cooperative activities, the offering of other kinds of political and economic incentives, and the provision of consensual economic and political assistance. These are in addition to the forms of action carried out within the UN human rights system itself, with its procedures for monitoring and reporting. Finally, and of increasing salience, human rights violations supply reasons for assorted forms of contestation by non-state actors, ranging from reporting and advocacy to transnational political organizing.

Fourth, the features I have listed, taken together, characterize human rights as the constitutive elements of a public political practice that aims to regulate relations among states and other international agents. Human rights are publicly available norms to which appeal can be made to justify political action. This fact has two corollaries. First, as public standards, human rights need not presuppose the general acceptance of any particular philosophical or religious view about their moral basis (though of course they are not equally accessible from every such view). As the early interpreters of international human rights doctrine recognized, human rights are open to a variety of justifications.14 Second and relatedly, human rights are norms crafted to apply to whole classes of cases whose empirical characteristics are likely to be quite diverse. The weights to be attached to the reasons for action arising from actual or potential violations in any particular case, and the array of possibly conflicting reasons that might be at play in that case, will vary with the empirical background. The application of norms to cases will therefore require judgment, and one should not be surprised to discover that these judgments might be controversial. As Joshua Cohen puts it, human rights define a "terrain of deliberation and argument" rather than a set of fixed points for law and policy.15 That they do so ought not to be regarded as a deficiency; it is part of the nature of a public, normative practice.

#### **III. The Conceptual Challenge**

One source of skepticism about subsistence rights is conceptual. It holds that once we understand what it is for something to be a right, we shall see that there cannot be

<sup>13</sup> The thought might be encouraged by the conception of human rights set forth by John Rawls in *The Law of Peoples* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), section 10. I believe he is right to conceptualize human rights in terms of the types of political action their violation might justify. But it distorts contemporary practice to fix on coercive intervention as the modal type.

<sup>14</sup> Eg, Jacques Maritain, "Introduction," in UNESCO, *Human Rights: Comments and Interpretations* (London: Allan Wingate, 1949), 10.

<sup>15</sup> Joshua Cohen, "Minimalism about Human Rights: The Most We Can Hope For?" *Journal of Political Philosophy*, 12 (2004): 195.

subsistence human rights. They are ruled out for lack of one or more essential features of rights.16

Many people have held this view in one or another form.17 Consider, for example, the version advanced by Onora O'Neill.18 She distinguishes between "normative" and "aspirational" views of rights and argues that a value cannot count as a right, on a "normative" view, unless it can be seen as the ground of a claim that specifically identifiable other agents have obligations to act or refrain from acting in ways that would result in the claimant's having or being able to enjoy the value. Values not satisfying this complex condition are better conceived of as "aspirations:" they describe goods that their beneficiaries have reason to want but do not identify any agent as having an obligation to provide them. O'Neill thinks it obvious that the familiar "rights of man" to freedom, property, and security can count as rights on a "normative" view because the inferences to be drawn from claims of right about the deontic situations of other agents are clear: these are rights against interference that everybody has a duty to respect. She believes that the same cannot be said about rights to goods and services such as food and health care. Without more, rights to goods, as opposed to rights against interference, do not generate obligations for specific agents, the performance of which would result in enjoyment of the substance of the rights. When somebody's "right" to food or health care is unsatisfied, we have no way of saying who is responsible. We must regard rights of this latter kind as merely aspirational; since they do not serve to guide the actions of any agent, they are without normative force.19

Joel Feinberg took what might appear to be a similar position when he described economic rights as "manifesto rights." Such rights, in his view, "are not necessarily correlated with the duties of any assignable persons" because "under widely prevalent conditions of scarcity and conflict, [they may] be impossible for *anyone* to discharge."20 Feinberg seems to have believed, as an empirical matter, that there is no feasible assignment of duties such that their performance would result in the satisfaction of everyone's subsistence rights. Today, of course, this is very likely false. But leave the empirical question aside for the moment. The important point for our purposes is that in Feinberg's view, even if a "manifesto right" cannot be satisfied in the present, it might still be action guiding. He thought we should understand the assertion of "manifesto rights" as "expressing the conviction that they ought to be recognized by states as potential rights and consequently as determinants of present aspirations and guides to present policies."21 Feinberg did not disparage "manifesto rights" as normatively inert. He held that they can guide action even if they are not correlated with duties to see to the satisfaction of the right for any particular person in need. They do so by establishing as a priority goal of political action the creation of conditions in

<sup>16</sup> Parts of this section restate an argument from *IHR*, 120–1 and 164–6.

<sup>17</sup> Eg, Maurice Cranston, *What Are Human Rights?* (London: Bodley Head, 1973), 65–71; Bernard Williams, "Human Rights and Relativism," in Bernard Williams, *In the Beginning Was the Deed* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), 63–5.

<sup>18</sup> Onora O'Neill, "The Dark Side of Human Rights," *International Affairs*, 81 (2005): 427–39.

<sup>19</sup> O'Neill, "The Dark Side of Human Rights," 428.

<sup>20</sup> Joel Feinberg, *Social Philosophy* (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1973), 94 (emphasis in original).

<sup>21</sup> Feinberg, *Social Philosophy*, 67.

which it would be possible to satisfy the right, and hence to assign duties to see to its satisfaction.

Here is another way to put the point. A government's failure to prevent or remediate a deprivation can give rise to two types of reasons for action. "Direct" reasons are reasons to act in ways whose success would bring about enjoyment of the substance of the right for those deprived. Reasons of this type can call for various kinds of action—for example, ceasing activities that bring about or contribute to the deprivation, offering protection against threats of deprivation by other agents or by natural forces, or providing aid that would offset or compensate for the effects of the deprivation. "Indirect" reasons are those that count in favor of actions by which an agent can help establish conditions in which those deprived could enjoy the substance of the right in the future. A particularly important indirect reason is the reason one may have to contribute to the establishment and operation of institutions and practices designed to undertake such actions. An agent's situation would be analogous to what it might be in an unjust society: although there would be no duty to comply with the rules that would apply if the society's institutions were just, one might have a duty to help establish just arrangements with which one would have a duty to comply once they were established, at least when this could be done without excessive sacrifice.22 What the idea of a "manifesto right" shows is that although circumstances may be such that there are no direct reasons for action available (perhaps, as Feinberg thought, because resources are scarce, or perhaps, as O'Neill suggests, because there is no institutional mechanism for assigning obligations to act), there may nevertheless be indirect reasons.

There is a further point. Let us continue to suppose, (again) most likely counterfactually but as Feinberg appears to have believed, that there is no feasible assignment of duties under which everyone's subsistence rights would be satisfied. This still would not mean that nobody has any direct reasons to act. Even if it were not possible to satisfy everyone's subsistence rights in the present, it might be possible to satisfy the rights of some, or to increase the level of satisfaction of the rights of all. Possibilities like these may be what is intended by the idea of "progressive realization."23 These possibilities are capable of supplying reasons for action in the present even if there were no feasible sequence of actions that could be taken now that would result in enjoyment of the substance of subsistence rights by all those presently deprived.

To return to the skeptical view, we can now see that the distinction between the "normative" and the "aspirational" is incomplete. It does not follow from the (supposed) fact that there is no assignment of obligations under which everyone's enjoyment of the substance of the right would be secured that such a right cannot generate reasons for action. There may be direct reasons to help some people, even if it is not possible to help all. And there may be indirect reasons to help create more favorable conditions. The distinction between "normative" and "aspirational" interpretations of

<sup>22</sup> I adapt John Rawls's formulation of the natural duty of justice. *A Theory of Justice*, rev. edn. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), section 19.

<sup>23</sup> Each state shall "take steps. . .to the maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the full realization of the rights recognized in the present Covenant by all appropriate means." ICESCR, Article 2.

subsistence rights obscures these ways that subsistence rights can be action-guiding. It has the effect of ruling out an interpretation of subsistence rights more in keeping with a practical conception of human rights than either of these alternatives.

It is a further question whether and why anyone, and in particular prospective donors, should care about violations of subsistence rights, even if they are not conceptually suspect. This is a normative question and, on the view I have sketched, we cannot avoid it. Reflection about this question suggests a second skeptical doubt.

### **IV. The Normative Challenge**

Our second skeptical view differs from the first in accepting that subsistence rights might count as bona fide human rights even if they do not serve as grounds of assignable obligations whose successful performance would result in satisfaction of the interests the rights are meant to protect. The view arises in response to the fact that, within the practice, human rights violations are supposed to generate reasons for action for agents in a position to prevent or remediate the violations, particularly those outside the society in which the violations occur. It holds that any candidate for recognition as a human right should satisfy what we might call the "sufficient reason" condition: a government's persistent failure to prevent or remediate violations should generate reasons that would be sufficient to justify action by (some) outside agents under reasonably foreseeable circumstances. The normative challenge holds that in typical cases in which subsistence interests are threatened, the sufficient reason condition is not likely to be satisfied.24

Since the urgency of subsistence interests is beyond question, we might begin by asking how the normative challenge gets off the ground. In response, we should recall what I observed earlier: that the actions for which violations of subsistence rights might provide reasons, although aimed at protecting and satisfying the interests of their beneficiaries, are likely to be burdensome for their prospective agents. It can always be asked why this or that agent should incur a cost in order to contribute to protecting or advancing the interests of others. In certain circumstances it may be enough to reply that the interest is urgent and the prospective agent is in a position to satisfy or protect it without significant cost or risk. But as a general matter, considerations of urgency, capacity, and cost will not be enough to determine whether potential agents have sufficient reason to act to protect or satisfy subsistence interests, particularly when they are considered on a large scale and threats to them are understood to be consequences of complex and deep-seated natural and social facts. Typically more needs to be said—for example, about the causes of the likely threats, the nature of the historical and contemporary relationships between those deprived and the potential agents, and the consequences for third parties of protecting the interests or allowing them to go unprotected.

The normative challenge arises from doubt that enough more *can* be said. The doubt can have various sources. One, of course, is a more general alienation from morality

24 Parts of this section restate the argument in *IHR*, 168–73.

(doubt, that is, that arises from skepticism that we can ever owe each other anything), but I leave that aside. Someone can take moral considerations seriously yet still believe that under the circumstances to be expected the considerations at hand are not likely to be strong enough to command action. This is the kind of doubt that interests me. It consists of the belief that in the typical case in which subsistence interests are threatened on a large scale, the reasons for action likely to be available to any prospective external agent are not strong or weighty enough to offset the other reasons for action (in other realms) likely to be in competition for that agent's adherence.

Suppose, for example, that one accepts the following two sets of beliefs. One might believe, first, that although severe poverty is always an occasion for beneficence, reasons of beneficence can exercise only limited command over our lives and resources. This is not only because there are some goods and commitments we reasonably judge to be too important or too central to the conduct of our own lives to be given up.25 It is also because, in living our lives, we regularly find ourselves having to resolve conflicts between reasons of beneficence and (other-regarding) reasons of various other kinds—for example, to take care of dependants, to contribute to cooperative schemes from which we benefit, to pay our debts, and so forth. One might think that those other kinds of reasons would typically be weightier. Second, one might believe that severe poverty, at least when it occurs in another society, is not usually an occasion for any particular other kind of reason for action. Perhaps one thinks the sources of severe poverty are so diverse that it is impossible to generalize in ways that would enable responsibility for ameliorative action to be fixed in any agent or set of agents. Poverty may be brought about or sustained by features of the local culture and political traditions; it may be a legacy of historical injustice; or it may be imposed or sustained by patterns of exploitative international economic transactions or the exercise of unequal bargaining power by other societies. If one grants that (some of) an agent's reasons to act in response to a threat to someone else's urgent interests depend on the agent's relationship to the threat, then it may seem that no single account can explain why and to what extent severe poverty, wherever it occurs, should provide a reason for potential agents in other societies to bear the costs of its alleviation. The conjunction of these beliefs produces the conclusion that, in the general case, the violation of subsistence rights does not provide a distinctive reason for action to external agents. There is always beneficence, but in a world with limited resources and multiple demands, much of the time reasons of beneficence will be trumped by other reasons. If this is right, then in typical cases of violation, subsistence rights may not satisfy the "sufficient reason" condition.

One thing that might be said in response is that the challenge depends on a faulty judgment about the weight of considerations of beneficence as they apply to cases of severe material deprivation. I believe there is much to be said for this line of response. Subsistence interests are indeed urgent and the costs to the affluent countries of taking

<sup>25</sup> This point is emphasized in T.M. Scanlon's remarks on reasons to give aid in *What We Owe to Each Other* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 224. For a discussion of this aspect of Scanlon's view, see Elizabeth Ashford, "The Demandingness of Scanlon's Contractualism," *Ethics*, 13 (2003): 273–302.

steps that could produce a significant improvement in satisfaction are modest relative to their economic capacities.26 To this we should add the familiar observation that the idea that reasons of beneficence can only exercise limited command over our lives and resources applies differently to whole societies than to individuals. One reason we are inclined to accept this idea, at the level of interpersonal morality, is the perception that by contributing to the satisfaction of the interests of third parties under circumstances in which others cannot be expected to do the same, one sets oneself at a relative disadvantage. But matters look different when we think of human rights as institutional rather than interpersonal standards. When a local government is unable to prevent or remediate deprivations of subsistence rights, the international agents who have reasons for action are collective agents—other states, international organizations, private non-governmental organizations, and the like. Most such agents have a capacity to manage problems of individual relative disadvantage by distributing the cost of acting across whole populations. So considerations of beneficence may command a larger contribution when the actions they support are taken or coordinated by institutional agents than when the same considerations are acted on seriatim by individuals. The tendency to think of human rights as individual claim-rights obscures this fact.

These points are important. However, I want to concentrate on a more basic aspect of the normative challenge. The challenge seems plausible due to a background belief that the only reason for action that we can be sure will arise for external agents in cases of severe poverty is a reason of beneficence. As I have stated it, however, this is ambiguous. One interpretation—the "no single reason" view—holds that, beneficence aside, there is no one reason or kind of reason for action that will arise for external agents throughout the range of what I have called standard cases of severe poverty. A different interpretation—the "no reason at all" view—holds that, beneficence aside, in most cases of severe poverty no other reason for action, of any kind, will arise for external agents.

The "no single reason" view is suggested by a thought I mentioned earlier: that the causes of poverty are too diverse to allow for generalizations that would enable responsibility to be placed. Perhaps there is no persuasive general reply to the question whether poverty tends to be generated or sustained by natural facts or contingent internal forces or, instead, is imposed or aggravated by aspects of the global political–economic order. If this is true, then we cannot say that severe poverty, wherever it occurs, typically gives rise to the same distinctive reason for action. Different cases must be treated differently. If any particular type of human rights claim must be interpreted as always demanding action for the same distinctive kind of reason, then there may be trouble ahead for subsistence rights.

But it is hardly obvious that we should accept the "no single reason" view. Human rights, as I have said, is a public normative practice. Within the practice, specific rights operate in the same way that middle-level principles operate in other practical

<sup>26</sup> There is no non-controversial way to evaluate these costs. Jeffrey Sachs reports a range of estimates, with varying assumptions as to the kind and extent of investments required, between 0.5% and 0.7% of the GDP of the rich countries. *The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time* (New York: Penguin Press, 2005), ch. 15. See also Paul Collier, *The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing and What Can Be Done About It* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), esp. ch. 11.

domains. We typically expect practical principles to rest on some deeper level of reasoning in which a variety of basic ethical concerns are brought together with facts about the world in a way that shows the principles to be reliable guides to action in the range of circumstances we are likely to confront. So, for example, the principle of freedom of expression might be thought to summarize and bring into focus an array of underlying ethical and practical considerations lying at a more fundamental level of practical reasoning.27 It is not an objection that the circumstances to which the principle will have to apply may vary in their morally significant features or that, as a result, different elements of the principle's justification will be significant in different circumstances. This is just how practical principles function.

It is the same for human rights. As the constitutive norms of a public doctrine, human rights should afford reasons for action across a wide range of more-or-less likely circumstances ("typical" or "standard" cases). But we have no more reason here than in other domains to require that the same reason or weighted set of reasons motivate the application of a human right to every set of circumstances to which it applies.

So the question we should care about is not whether a single analysis of the sources of poverty applies to all standard cases, so that, in all such cases, external agents would face the same kind of reason to act. The question is whether, for each type of case in the central range, we can discern some reason or set of reasons, in addition to considerations of beneficence, that would be sufficient to require external agents to act in some foreseeable circumstances. It need not be the same kind of reason in every case.

Here I can only offer this as a conjecture, but I believe the answer is yes. To see why this might be plausible one must consider the patterns of interaction that might exist between societies containing substantial amounts of severe poverty and more affluent societies with which they interact and ask in each case what kinds of reasons for action would be available to external agents.28 The possibilities begin with two limiting cases. One is autarchy; here, by hypothesis, there are no reasons other than those of beneficence in play. The other is symmetrical interdependence, in which poor and non-poor societies cooperate as equals. The most important reasons in this case have to do with the fairness of individual transactions and of whatever cooperative practices and institutions organize them. These polar cases are, however, not very interesting for our purposes. There are several intermediate and, on the whole, more likely possibilities which I hope can be suggested with descriptive labels: for example, harmful interaction, historical injustice, mutually beneficial exploitation, and political dependence. Each pattern evokes a different kind of reason for action: for example, not to cause harm, to compensate for the results of harm done earlier, not to exploit one's bargaining advantage, to respect the interest in collective self-determination. This does not exhaust the possibilities but it will illustrate the point. The relationships that characterize the various dyads of interacting poor and affluent societies are diverse, not only in the patterns of interaction they instantiate but also in the reasons

<sup>27</sup> Consider, eg, Mill's argument for liberty of thought and discussion in "On Liberty" [1859], in *Essays on Politics and Society I* [*Collected Works of John Stuart Mill*, vol. 18], ed. J. M. Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977), 213–310.

<sup>28</sup> Compare A.J. Julius, "Nagel's Atlas," *Philosophy & Public Affairs*, 34 (2006): 189–90.

why these patterns are morally salient. But it seems plausible that most such dyads are characterized by one or more of these or similarly salient patterns. Except for autarchy, each pattern suggests a different reason for action that would arise for the rich country from poverty in the poor one. If this is right, then members of affluent societies are likely to have some reason to act to reduce poverty or to mitigate its effects in most poor societies with which they actually interact, but these reasons will vary in strength and perhaps in the forms of action they call for.

Two further considerations reinforce this conjecture. The first concerns uncertainty. There is reasonable disagreement about the causes of societal poverty and wealth. The disagreement manifests itself at the aggregate level and in connection with many, and perhaps even most, individual cases.29 In any dyadic relationship it may not be known to what extent the parties' present or past interactions contribute or contributed to the affluence of one or the poverty of the other. A workable public practice of human rights must abstract from these uncertainties. The parties' asymmetrical vulnerability to error supplies a reason to resolve the uncertainty in favor of the more vulnerable party.30

The other consideration concerns the international structure. I presented the diversity of reasons for action as arising from a range of patterns of dyadic interaction among individual agents, but in practice, of course, these patterns are frequently organized and facilitated by international property law and the international institutions that regulate trade and finance. To the extent that features of the international structure enable or facilitate patterns of interaction that are objectionable in one of the ways we have distinguished, those in a position to benefit may come under pressure from an additional kind of reason for action, one requiring them to reform the structure or compensate for its undesirable effects on those who cannot avoid them at reasonable cost.31

All of this suggests that, if we accept the two-level model's characterization of a human right, then the "sufficient reason" condition does not rule out subsistence rights as human rights. Consider again the analogy with freedom of expression. When one invokes the principle of free speech, one is saying, among other things, that we have reasons to want institutions to offer some reliable form of protection against various interferences with expression that might be anticipated in a society's general circumstances. Different kinds of interferences might be objectionable for different of these reasons and might call for different kinds of protection. The nature and strength of the reasons, and the kind of protection required, are matters to be worked out, so to speak, at the "point of application." Similarly, when one asserts a human right, say, to an adequate standard of living, one is saying, among other things, that external agents have reasons to act when domestic governments either fail or are unable to provide

<sup>29</sup> One way to see this is to consider the difficulties in devising a theory of economic growth capable of explaining inter-country differences in growth rates in sufficiently specific terms to guide policy. There is an instructive survey in Dani Rodrik, *One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic Growth* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), ch. 1.

<sup>30</sup> Thanks to Thomas Pogge for this observation.

<sup>31</sup> For an exploration of the moral considerations associated with the structure and norms of the global trade regime, see Aaron James, *Fairness in Practice* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).

the protections such a right calls for. Since I cannot argue it here, I have proposed as a conjecture that we are likely to have good grounds for believing that in many and probably most cases of severe poverty, there will be reasons for action available of significant weight. The details of these reasons and the nature and extent of required action depend on features of the individual case.

### **V. Objections**

I have argued that two sources of skepticism about the justification for counting subsistence rights as human rights will be less troubling if we adopt a conception of human rights in keeping with the contemporary practice. In responding to the second skeptical view, I have also pointed to a range of potentially relevant reasons for action that may arise for agents in a position to contribute to the satisfaction of subsistence rights where they are most severely threatened. With the exception of reasons of beneficence, these considerations pertain to the nature of the relationships between potential contributors to and beneficiaries of subsistence guarantees, and so they complement the beneficiary-oriented considerations that motivate Ashford's moral inconsistency argument.

I would like to conclude by commenting about two objections that may be provoked by the view I have taken here. The first is this. A practice-based approach takes its understanding of the nature and role of human rights from the discursive practice as we observe it. But regarded from a moral point of view, this might lead to excessively conservative conclusions. According to the two-level model, the governments of states have the primary responsibilities to satisfy human rights and external agents have secondary responsibilities to act when states fail or default. This is in accord with the authoritative documents of international human rights, but one might regard it as too narrow. Why should not human rights requirements apply directly ("in the first instance") to agents other than states—to international institutions, for instance, or to multinational firms? After all, these types of agents are capable of setting back the interests protected by human rights in many of the same ways as the governments of states. It is sometimes said, for example, that enforcement of the intellectual property provisions of world trade law leads to avoidable deprivations of life-saving medications in poor countries. If this is true, why should we not say that these provisions violate subsistence rights? And that, if the two-level model denies the propriety of making such a claim, so much the worse for the model?32

I believe the best response to this objection is to deny its premise. International institutions such as the trade regime are creatures of states. They are the outcomes of international negotiations and exercise whatever authority they possess as agents of their members. A state that adheres to an agreement whose enforcement results in deprivations of the interests protected by a human right for its own people violates that right. And the prospect of violation supplies a reason for other states to refrain from adhering themselves or insisting on adherence by others, or perhaps to revise the

<sup>32</sup> I am grateful to Thomas Pogge for pressing this question. A similar question is raised by O'Neill, "The Dark Side of Human Rights," 434–5.

terms. This suggests that there may be nothing one might want to say about the bearing of human rights standards on international institutions that would be foreclosed by accepting the two-level model.

Things are more complicated in the cases of multinational firms and other non-state actors that cannot be regarded as the agents of states. It is true that business firms are usually chartered by one or another state and that their operations fall within the jurisdictions of states. States that fail to regulate their conduct in ways aimed at avoiding deprivations of interests protected by human rights might therefore be said to be violators. And perhaps business firms, like non-governmental organizations, can be counted among the external agents that can acquire secondary obligations to act when the governments of states default. But it would require an artificial stretch to say, within the terms of the two-level model, that multinational firms can be primary violators of human rights. The question is what to make of this fact. It does not count against the two-level view as a model of contemporary human rights practice; the practice, by design, primarily regulates the conduct of states. One might well conclude, however, after considering the effectiveness of the practice, that the limitation of human rights enforcement to states is ineffective against certain kinds of threats and that the practice is in need of reform. The reformist argument would have to be that the regulative aims of the practice are frustrated by its own existing limitations. I have some sympathy for this argument but it is beyond my scope to pursue it here. All I mean to suggest is that a practical approach to human rights does not foreclose criticism of the structure of the practice.

Let me turn now to a second objection. A consequence of thinking about human rights in the way I have suggested is that human rights claims may often leave more to be worked out at the "point of application" than one might wish. This is because the grounds and force of a claim will vary with the context in which it is made, and because the reasons supporting the claim will have to be reconciled with whatever conflicting reasons exist under the circumstances. This picture of human rights as privileged but not necessarily decisive norms of action stands in contrast to another picture of human rights that people sometimes entertain. In that alternative picture, human rights claims are expected to be conclusively action-guiding: that is, as if, once it is established that an assertion of right is warranted under the circumstances, no more needs to be said about whether action is required. If torture or genocide or political repression are going on, they should stop. What else might there be to say? But human rights as the two-level model characterizes them may not operate this way. On this characterization, human rights claims serve two related purposes: they call attention to the likelihood that without some form of legal or political action, urgent human interests are likely to be set back, and they recall that in most such cases, at least some agents who are in a position to take action are likely to have relatively strong reasons to do so. But from a perspective that regards human rights as the most important of political values this may seem anemic.

The justification for adopting this characterization is that this is, in fact, how human rights often seem to function in the discursive practice of contemporary global political life. The cases mentioned earlier—torture, genocide, political repression—are special; the threatened interests are uncontroversially urgent and given plausible assumptions about the empirical background, there are unlikely to be offsetting reasons that would argue against acting to eliminate or contain the threats to these interests. But many of the human rights of international practice are not like this. Subsistence rights, in particular, protect against complicated threats whose lasting containment or elimination pose a complex challenge to public policy and may never be fully achieved.

It is tempting to describe human rights as the language of global justice.33 But this would be excessive: human rights are not the whole of justice, even of global justice. They state a partial standard, limited primarily to what are plausibly regarded as expectations to which it is reasonable for the international community to hold domestic-level governments. What seems correct in that description is the suggestion that human rights have come to occupy a privileged place in the discourse of global political life. They are public standards for domestic-level institutions to which appeal can be made in claims for external help. Their privileged place is based on the urgency of the underlying interests and the likelihood that various external agents will have good reasons to act when domestic-level governments fail egregiously to protect these interests against predictable threats. The combination of the normative ambition of human rights doctrine taken as a whole and the diversity of situation among the world's societies makes it inevitable that these standards will exhibit a substantial amount of open texture. So it would be unrealistic, even if it were not a mistake for other reasons, to expect even well-founded assertions of human rights to determine decisions about who should act and in which ways. Yet if I am right about the nature of the practice, this is no reason to disparage the normative force of human rights in general or of subsistence rights in particular.

33 I have been tempted myself, eg, in "Human Rights as a Common Concern," *American Political Science Review*, 95 (2001): 269.