---
title: "Rescuing Human Rights from Proportionality"
author:
  - name: "Guglielmo Verdirame"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "341–358"
citation_key: "verdirame2015response"
---

## <span id="page-355-0"></span> [Rescuing Human Rights from Proportionality](#page-8-3)

#### *Guglielmo Verdirame**

Proportionality has become a staple of adjudication on fundamental rights in international and domestic courts. It has been embraced by civil and common law judges alike, and described as the "principle of principles" and the "ultimate rule of law".1 Unsurprisingly, legal scholars are turning their attention to it.

Most studies of proportionality have been doctrinal but even these approaches cannot ignore the philosophical foundations of proportionality. George Letsas's main claim is that proportionality, as developed by international and constitutional courts and "understood as denoting egalitarian rights against one's government",2 can be part of a moral theory of human rights. Proportionality—he argues—need not take us where many of us, him included, do not wish to be taken: utilitarianism. Although he acknowledges that the application of proportionality by courts has at times been utilitarian, he thinks the blame does not lie with the idea of proportionality itself.

It is true that not in all cases where proportionality was at least nominally applied a utilitarian approach followed, but is this enough to let proportionality off the hook?

I begin where Letsas does—with a classification of the different uses of the term proportionality, although my taxonomy differs from Letsas's in some important respects. I then proceed to address a question that should be at the heart of both explanatory and normative accounts of proportionality: what is the justification for proportionality in the different contexts in which it is applied? By looking at different uses of proportionality in a systematic fashion, I challenge the idea that there is an overarching canon of proportionality stretching from geometry to aesthetics of which legal proportionality is just an instantiation. The next question I address is whether the application of proportionality to fundamental rights can be based on anything other than a consequentialist idea of rights. Letsas maintains that we can make *moral* sense of proportionality outside utilitarianism.3 Although Letsas's efforts have much to be commended, I remain of the view that an approach to human

<sup>*</sup> King's College London. I am grateful to the Templeton Foundation for supporting a research initiative on the theory and practice of human rights for which Jacob Mchangama, Dr Aaron Rhodes and I were the principal investigators. I am also indebted to the comments of the editors of this collection, and of Joseph Raz, Larry Siedentop, John Tasioulas, Leif Wenar, and the participants in a seminar on the idea of human rights held in London on 8–9 May 2013 as part of the Templeton project.

<sup>1</sup> Imer Flores, "Proportionality in Constitutional and Human Rights Interpretation", *Problema: Anuario de Filosofia y Teoria del Derecho*, 7 (2013): 87 and 113; David Betty, *The Ultimate Rule of Law* (Oxford University Press, 2004) esp. 159ff.

<sup>2</sup> Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", this volume, ch. 17.

<sup>3</sup> Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 318.

rights that is centred on proportionality cannot be reconciled with non-utilitarian conceptions of human rights.

### **I. Meanings of Proportionality**

Letsas identifies "four ways in which the concept of proportionality is used":4 first, in statements that describe physical features of the world; second, in "moral judgments about what rights people have according to some value (for example, democracy or retribution)";5 third, as a tool of instrumental rationality; and fourth as a principle of utility. While the first notion of proportionality is descriptive, the others—he maintains—are normative. According to Letsas, the "orthodox understanding of proportionality amongst constitutional scholars and judges" combines instrumental rationality and utility. I will return to this "orthodox understanding" in the next section, but first let us consider the different meanings of proportionality.

Proportionality is in origin a mathematical idea. It describes the ratio between two variables which may be arithmetic (for example, in the Fibonacci sequence) or geometric (for example, in Pythagoras's theorem). The variables may also be physical forces, as in Netwon's law of gravity. In some cases proportionality between physical elements will reflect a law of physics (again, in the example of gravity); in others it will reflect a value judgment (for instance, a recipe which prescribes ratios between different ingredients).

Proportionality can also be a standard of aesthetics. The correlation between aesthetic ideas, such as beauty and harmony, and proportions has been a feature of Western thought at least since the Pythagoreans. A classic illustration is Leonardo's *Vitruvian Man*. In aesthetics the boundary between descriptive and prescriptive proportionality is sometimes blurred. Aesthetic proportionality is not always decoupled from mathematical or physical proportionality. For the proportions which generate beauty may also be considered true in a natural sense, albeit probably in that peculiar Greek sense of truth as "un-hiddenness" (ἀλήθεια):6 the idea, for example, that a golden ratio governs proportions in art and architecture has often been regarded as a hidden mathematical truth about the physical world capable of generating, among other things, a perception of beauty.7

Proportionality has traditionally been an important canon of both distributive and retributive justice. This is the case in Aristotle's theory of distributive justice which culminates with the judgment that "[t]he just is. . .the proportionate, and the unjust is that which is contrary to the proportionate".8 The notion that punishment should

4 Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 322. 5 Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 322.

<sup>6</sup> On the relationship between the idea of truth and concealment see Heidegger's essay "On the Essence of Truth", in Martin Heidegger, *Pathmarks* (Cambridge University Press, ed. Wlliam McNeill, 1998) esp. 148ff.

<sup>7</sup> In Plato's aesthetics, proportions are idealistic and art is conceived as approximation, or imitation (μίμησις), of these perfect proportions. A later example of this idealization of proportions is the classic work of Renaissance aesthetics, *De divina proportione* (1509) by Luca Pacioli.

<sup>8</sup> *Nicomachean Ethics*, 1130b (V.iv.3) This is my translation based on the Greek text in the *Loeb Classical Library* (1926). I have been aided by the H. Rackham translation in *Loeb* as well as the R. Crisp translation in the Cambridge University Press edition (2000) of *Nicomachean Ethics*. Aristotle uses the

have some correlation to the offence is at the heart of most philosophies of retribution, the *lex talionis* being an example. Also connected to the theory of justice is the use of proportionality in arguments about desert.9

Proportionality is often invoked in practical reason—or, more accurately, in that particular type of practical reason that governs judgments about instrumentality. This kind of proportionality is relevant to certain areas of the law, for example when deciding on the requirement in the law of self-defence that we use only such force as is, in the circumstances, necessary and proportionate.

Finally, proportionality has been developed by courts as a juridical doctrine in cases on the limitation of constitutionally or internationally protected fundamental rights. Proportionality only applies to rights that are subject to express or implied limitation.10 German public lawyers, who are credited with first developing the concept of proportionality, understand proportionality to include "three sub-principles": the rational connection between the measure limiting rights and the legitimate aim it purports to pursue (*suitability*); the absence of alternative measures which would not violate the fundamental right or would do so to a lesser extent (*necessity*); and the balance between the detriment to the fundamental right and the satisfaction of the legitimate aim for which that right is being limited (proportionality *stricto sensu*).11

word ἀναλογία for proportionality. He draws a further distinction between geometric proportionality (ἀναλογία ἐκείνη) and arithmetic proportionality (ἀναλογία ἀριθμητική)—*Nichomachean Ethics* 1132a (V.iv.3). The former applies to distributive justice and the latter to corrective justice. On the use of the term ἀναλογία in Aristotle, see Carl Huffman, *Archytas of Tarentum: Pythagorean, Philosopher and Mathematician King* (Cambridge University Press, 2005), 179–81. In Greek philosophy and mathematics a third type of proportionality was also discussed (subcontrary or harmonious proportionality)—see the fragment from Porphyry attributed to Archytas (Huffman, *Archytas of Tarentum*, 162–4 and 168–70).

The reason why different kinds of proportionality apply to distributive and corrective justice may elude the modern reader. The cue is in the fact that, according to Aristotle, for distribution to be just the same ratio must apply to the shares that are being distributed from the common stock as to the persons to whom those shares are assigned, because "if the persons are not equal, they will not receive equal shares" (*Nichomachean Ethics* 1131a (V.iii.6)). The premise of this argument is natural inequality. By contrast, in corrective justice, the natural inequality of the individuals is irrelevant "[f]or it makes no difference whether a good man has defrauded a bad man or a bad one a good one" (*Nichomachean Ethics* 1132a, (V.iv.3). On the transition from natural inequality to natural equality in Western thought see Larry Siedentop, *Inventing the Individual* (Allen Lane, 2014).

9 This is also already evident in the *Nichomachean Ethics* 1131a (V.iii.7). See also the discussion of the ratio view of desert in S. Kagan, "Comparative Desert" in Serena Olsaretti (ed.), *Desert and Justice* (Oxford University Press, 2007), 100–3.

10 In the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), a right is typically guaranteed in the first sub-section of a provision (eg, Article 8(1): "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence"), and subject to limitation in the second sub-section (eg, Article 8(2): "There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others"). On implied limitations see Aharon Barak, *Proportionality: Constitutional Rights and Their Limitations* (Cambridge University Press, 2012), 134–9.

11 Robert Alexy, "Constitutional Rights, Balancing, and Rationality", *Ratio Juris*, 16 (2003): 131, 135–6 and Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 9.

This understanding of proportionality is no longer exclusive to German public law. Aharon Barak, former President of the Israeli Supreme Court (one of the many courts to embrace proportionality over the last decades), gives the following account of proportionality *stricto sensu*:

...the required balance is between the marginal social importance of the benefit in fulfilling the law's proper purpose, and the marginal social importance in preventing the harm to the constitutional right. This therefore concerns the relative notion of social importance found on each side of the scale.12

An important question is whether these different uses of proportionality—from mathematics to physics, from aesthetics to practical reason, from retributive to distributive justice, and so on—share any common feature. Each case is said to be about balancing. But this does not tell us very much. First, there is a difference between the balancing that requires a judgment of *suitability* (for example, whether the means are appropriate to meet the ends) and the balancing that requires a judgment of *comparability* (for example, whether a certain social benefit is weightier than another). Secondly, the terms involved in these various balancing exercises differ. In retributive justice, they are the gravity of the offence and the severity of the punishment. In distributive justice, those terms are the scope of an individual's entitlement, and the portion of the common stock to which he is laying claim. In proportionality as an adjudicative principle on the limitation of fundamental rights, the terms that are being balanced seem to be two types of benefits to society—one deriving from the protection of the fundamental right and the other from a competing public interest.

Understanding at the outset that the different senses in which proportionality is used have little in common by way of justification is important because, as we are about to see, there is a tendency to present proportionality as a kind of self-evident principle requiring no justification. The different uses of proportionality must instead each be justified on its own terms: there is no meta-justification of proportionality capable of accommodating all of them.

## **II. Justifications of Proportionality**

In the first meaning of proportionality discussed earlier, the justification may be found in principles of mathematics or in the laws of nature. However, if proportionality is used to prescribe a particular ratio between, for example, ingredients in a recipe or cocktail, the justification will be different: taste or flavour. In aesthetic judgments, the justification for proportionality is found in an underlying idea of beauty or harmony: proportions are simply attributes or manifestations of that idea.

In its uses in distributive and retributive justice, proportionality also gives effect to an underlying idea. The principles that wealth must be distributed among different persons or that a guilty person must be punished in proportion with the offence he has committed

<sup>12</sup> Barak, *Proportionality*, 11.

derive from particular conceptions of justice and desert. In both of those cases, proportionality is the method, not the basis, for justice.13

The notion that there should be proportionality between means and ends is justified by practical reason. If I use a crane to lift a shopping bag, I am doing something which, on any view of instrumental rationality, is irrational. This failure of rational judgment does not however always entail a failure of moral judgment, for instrumental rationality does not tell me whether I should in the first place pick up the shopping bag or not, and if so at what cost and with which means.

In proportionality in self-defence, a moral principle is engaged. If I kill a person for slapping me in the face, my action would be considered disproportionate *and* immoral. But this is not because there is a moral imperative of proportionality that is being violated, rather because I have exceeded the bounds of what the moral law of self-preservation allows me to do. Under that moral law, I have a right to do things that would otherwise be wrong in order to preserve my life or my bodily integrity but only to the extent necessary to that preservation. This law requires me to apply instrumental reasoning. If I choose means which, all circumstances considered, instrumental rationality cannot justify, the immunity which the moral law of self-preservation has accorded me will cease to apply.

Each of these uses of proportionality must therefore find a justification outside proportionality. Proportionality does not possess any intrinsic moral value. Moreover, the use of proportionality in one context cannot justify its uses in other contexts. Even if I am able to show that physical beauty must respect ideal proportions, it does not follow that distributive justice should also do so.

What is then the principled basis for applying proportionality to fundamental rights? In judgments by international human rights bodies and domestic courts, little is said on this topic. For perfectly good reasons courts are not in the habit of justifying their rulings by reference to first principles. Judges are not philosophers. Moreover, since proportionality is now part of the *jurisprudence constante* in many legal systems, courts can justify proportionality simply by reference to precedent. Yet, it is noteworthy that the legal instruments which are being applied—for example, the Bill of Rights in Germany's Basic Law; the ECHR; Israel's Basic Laws; or the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms—contain no mention of proportionality. So how did courts justify proportionality when they *first* applied it?

As mentioned, the consensus among scholars is that proportionality was first developed in German public law, and migrated from there to European law and beyond.14 To the extent that a principled basis was at all identified when proportionality was first introduced into these legal systems, that basis may have often included references to the use of proportionality in other areas. It is telling that Judge Barak introduces his analysis of the historical evolution of proportionality in constitutional jurisprudence

<sup>13</sup> Letsas cites democratic representation and punishment as examples of ways in which proportionality "can be used to express genuine moral concerns about what various values require" (Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 340), but I do not see what the case for proportional representation (PR) in elections has in common with the argument that punishment should be proportionate to the offence.

<sup>14</sup> Barak, *Proportionality*, 175ff.

with the heading "*Proportionality: In Life and in the Law*".15 One of the early decisions where the Israeli Supreme Court applied proportionality employs even more revealing language:

The notion of "balancing" controls us and everything that is around us. Planet Earth revolves around the sun "to balance" between the gravitational forces pushing it towards the sun and the gravitational forces pulling it back to outer space. Each and every one of us is a kind of "balance" between their father and mother and their respective families. The same is true for every living organism. The same is true of the legal universe . . . 16

Pythagorean echoes reverberate through this passage: the proportionality that exists between physical forces becomes a principle that governs both the macro- and the microcosm, and is then invoked to justify proportionality in law. But, as is often the case when the metaphors are rich, the reasoning is poor. Why should gravitational balancing provide a justification for rights balancing? As for the ECHR, in the first case where it applied proportionality, it did not even attempt to coax with metaphor. It simply stated that it would apply this principle.17

Some legal scholars have tried to come up with more sophisticated justifications for proportionality. According to one of its main defenders, Robert Alexy, proportionality "logically follows from the nature of principles; it can be deduced from them".18 The background to this position is Alexy's view that principles, including constitutional rights, are "optimisation requirements".19 Some scholars seek to enlist Ronald Dworkin in support of the case for proportionality, citing his distinction between rules and principles.20 It is true that principles, as understood by Dworkin, have "the dimension of weight and importance", and that conflicts between principles may be resolved by taking into account the relative weight of each principle.21 Nonetheless, for Dworkin the distinction between principles and rules is analytical—not normative. In his theory, principles, as "propositions that describe rights", may still include absolute rights;22 in his later writings, a number of political rights and human rights are clearly regarded as absolute trumps.23 Dworkin may have agreed with the idea that proportionality plays *some* role in the limitation of non-absolute rights, but not with the notion that proportionality inheres to fundamental rights in any *logical* sense. Moreover—and crucially—there is a fundamental difference between saying that principles (or values or interests) have different moral weight and saying that their moral weight depends on their ability to optimize. This is a point which will become clear later.

15 Barak, "*Proportionality*". Letsas also refers to the fact that proportionality has a life outside the law ("Rescuing Proportionality, 30).

<sup>16</sup> *Ganimat v. State of Israel* [1995] IsrSC 49(3) 355, 397 (cited in Barak, *Proportionality*, 345).

<sup>17</sup> "Every 'formality', 'condition', 'restriction or penalty imposed in this sphere must be proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued" (*Handyside v. United Kingdom*, Application no. 5493/72, Judgment of 7 December 1976, para 47). A critical analysis of the ECHR's approach to proportionality is found in S. Tsakyrakis, "Proportionality: An Assault on Human Rights", *International Journal of Constitutional Law*, 3 (2009): 468.

<sup>18</sup> Robert Alexy, *A Theory of Constitutional Rights* (Oxford University Press, 2002), 66.

<sup>19</sup> Alexy, "Constitutional Rights", 135. 20 See Flores "Proportionality", 86ff.

<sup>21</sup> Ronald Dworkin, *Taking Rights Seriously* (Duckworth, 1997), 26.

<sup>22</sup> Dworkin, *Taking Rights Seriously*, 90 and 92. 23 Dworkin, *Justice for Hedgehogs*, 327–39.

## **III. Human Rights and their Limits**

Some bills of rights contain no express limitation clauses. This is the case of the US Bill of Rights and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). Had the US State Department had its way, the same model would have been followed by the ECHR.24 Hersch Lauterpacht's proposal for an International Bill of Rights also avoided express limitation clauses.25

As for express limitations, they come in two types exemplified by the following provisions:

#### **Article 5(2), Germany's Basic Law**

These rights [of free expression] *find their limit* [*finden ihre Schranken*] in the provisions of the general laws, in statutory provisions for the protection of the youth and in the right to personal honour. [*emphasis added*]

#### **Article 10(2), European Convention on Human Rights**

*The exercise of these freedoms* [of expression], since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, *may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties* as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or the rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary. [*emphasis added*]

Rights in the first example are *limited rights*, while those in the second example are more aptly described as *qualified rights* or *limitable rights*. My interest here is not to discuss the judicial interpretation of these two different ways of limiting rights. I will not therefore undertake a comprehensive analysis of jurisprudence with a view to establishing if the distinction that I am about to draw is borne out by judicial practice. Rather, what I want to find out is if the difference between limited and limitable rights is a matter of mere terminology, or whether it contains a subtler conceptual distinction which can cast light on the relationship between proportionality and rights.

24 Brian Simpson, *Human Rights and the End of Empire* (Oxford University Press, 2004), 467. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union follows a different model. The provisions creating individual rights do not normally contain express limitations, but a general limitation clause is found in Article 52(1) which provides:

Any limitation on the exercise of the rights and freedoms recognised by this Charter must be provided for by law and respect the essence of those rights and freedoms. Subject to the principle of proportionality, limitations may be made only if they are necessary and genuinely meet objectives of general interest recognised by the Union or the need to protect the rights and freedoms of others.

The principle that "the essence" of the rights and freedoms cannot be subject to limitation is an important one. It mirrors the German constitutional jurisprudence that excludes dignity from proportionality. For a critique of the ECHR model of limiting rights as compared with these other models, see Andrew Williams, "The European Convention on Human Rights, the EU and the UK: Confronting a Heresy", *European Journal of International Law*, 24 (2013): 1157, 1169–71.

25 Hersch Lauterpacht, *An International Bill of the Rights of Man* (Columbia University Press, 1945, *reprinted* by Oxford University Press, 2013, with an introduction by Philippe Sands).

To understand how these two types of limitations exist in principle (as opposed to how courts have applied them), it may help to think of rights as allotments of land and of their limits as fences. I should emphasize that this metaphor is not premised on an exclusively individualistic conception of rights: ownership of land may still be connected to the idea of a common good—aesthetic or environmental for example.

Now, if I own a piece of land limited by a fence, within the fence I am, so to speak, sovereign; uncertainty as to the exact position of the fence may make my ownership of the contested spaces less secure but it will not change the overall sense of a strong title. If, instead, the position of the fence depends on the balancing of my interests with those of my neighbours, the quality of my ownership will be different: I may still describe myself as the owner of the land, but it will be ownership in a precarious, weaker and essentially indeterminate sense. Human rights that are limitable through proportionality are *weak rights*. By contrast, human rights that are limited, but not limitable, are still *strong rights* in terms of the nature of the entitlement they bestow upon us.

Doctrinal theories on the nature of balancing do not change this assessment. There are two views on the characterization of the effects of balancing. According to one view, the result of balancing is "a derivative constitutional rights norm in the form of a rule" which becomes a constitutional limit to the right.26 According to another view, the new rule that is formed does not operate on the constitutional level, but only on the sub-constitutional level.27 For the purposes of the distinction between limited rights as strong rights and limitable rights as weak rights, not much turns on these debates: whether each exercise of proportionality results in a constitutional rule or not, the right that is subject to open-ended limitation through proportionality still creates a weaker and more uncertain entitlement.

I have said that the exercise of limited rights is not subject to a general principle of balancing. To say that my right is limited is to say that it does not extend beyond a specified area: no question of balancing arises as long as I stay within the limits of the right. The areas excluded from the scope of the right may be defined teleologically, in which case a means-end review will be called for. A case in point is the right to free expression in Germany's Basic Law which, as we saw earlier, finds a limit in "laws for the protection of youth". If a state enacted a draconian law banning all unauthorized conversations between adults and minors, that law would have to be subjected to a means-end review in order to establish if it is really protecting minors. To do so, we would need to develop an appropriate legal test requiring, for example, a rational or suitable connection between the means (ie, the law) and the end (ie, the protection of minors). Applying a suitability test to this legislation, we would conclude that the outright ban is unlikely to have general positive effects on the protection of children, and probably has many negative ones. Because my right of free expression *finds a limit* only in those laws that do protect minors, if I choose to speak with a child without authorization, I would still be within my constitutional right.

The above example includes an assessment of consequences. The legal reason for this assessment is that the right is limited in terms that require such an assessment. But, even where a right is limited in this way, it remains qualitatively different from a

<sup>26</sup> Alexy, *A Theory of Constitutional Rights*, 56. 27 Barak, *Proportionality*, 39–42.

limitable right. There is a difference between consequences as grounds for qualifying rights and consequences as the basis for justifying rights.28 As the following analysis will show, rights that are generally limitable through proportionality can find justification only in consequentialism, whereas rights that are subject to a specific limit, for the identification of which consequences are relevant, are still consistent with non-consequentialist theories of rights.29

## **IV. Proportionality and the Idea of Human Rights**

My main contention here is that rights subject to limitation under a general proportionality test should be viewed with suspicion across the wide spectrum of liberal theories of fundamental rights that reject consequentialism. In this sense, the distinction between limited and limitable rights is not merely analytical. It also has a normative dimension.

The theoretical foundations of human rights have been explored extensively by others in this collection and elsewhere; I do not propose to do so again here. But in order to justify my contention that proportionality offends more than one theory of fundamental rights, let me take as a starting point the distinction between status-based and instrumental theories of human rights.30 According to the proponents of this distinction, status-based theories view human rights as "a non-derivative and fundamental element of morality. They embody a form of recognition of each individual's value which supplements and differs in kind from the form that leads us to value the overall increase of human happiness and the eradication of misery."31 On this account, instrumental theories are instead those which consider "rights [to be] morally derivative from other, more fundamental values".32

I will return to the theories labelled as instrumental later. For now let us consider how a status-based account of human rights would view rights limitable through

28 On this point see L. Wenar, "The Value of Rights", in M. O' Rourke, *Law and Social Justice* (MIT, 2005), 181. Letsas also appears to subscribe to the view that "balancing and limitation of rights need not be premised on utilitarian grounds" ("Rescuing Proportionality", 325), but his attempt to rescue proportionality does afford consequences a peculiar role. He maintains that balancing includes both epistemic and constitutive tasks: "when courts talk of 'balancing' rights against other considerations, what they often mean is that they are considering (which is an epistemic task) the effect of a measure upon the interests of both applicant and society at large, with a view to discover what moral rights people have (which is a constitutive task)" (p. 326). But if consequences are needed in order to discover what rights people have, do they not become the basis for justifying rights? This approach may not be the same as the kind of consequentialism where the primary factor is majoritarian utility, but it is still consequentialist in a fundamental sense.

29 This is where Letsas and I disagree. Letsas accepts that criticism of proportionality "is valid, insofar as it is directed against utilitarian or consequentialist approaches to right*s*" but, in my view, fails to see that rights limitable through general proportionality entail a consequentialist foundation. Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 324.

30 This distinction is challenged by many, among others John Tasioulas (see his "On the Foundations of Human Rights", this volume, ch. 1, and "Human Dignity as a Foundation for Human Rights", in C McCrudden (ed.), *Understanding Human Dignity* (Oxford University Press, 2013), 291–312).

31 T. Nagel, "Personal Rights and Public Space", *Philosophy & Public Affairs*, 24 (1995): 83, 87. See also: F.M. Kamm, "Non-consequentialism, the Person as an End-in-Itself, and the Significance of Status", *Philosophy and Public Affairs*, 21 (1992): 381.

32 Nagel, "Personal Rights and Public Space", 86.

proportionality. A passage from Jürgen Habermas's *Between Fact and Norm* offers a good starting point:

As soon as rights are transformed into goods and values in any individual case, each must compete with the others at the same level of priority. Every value is inherently just as particular as every other, whereas norms owe their validity to a universalization test. . .Because norms and principles, in virtue of their deontological character, can claim to be *universally binding* and not just *specially preferred*, they possess a greater justificatory force than values. Values must be brought into a transitive order with other values from case to case. Because there are no rational standards for this, weighing takes place either arbitrarily or unreflectively . . .33

Habermas maintains that the enforcement of a right is different from the enforcement of a value—an analytical distinction which few would find problematic although whether a moral distinction also corresponds to it is a different matter. Habermas continues:

An adjudication oriented by principles has to decide which claim and which action in a given conflict is right—and not how to balance interests or relate values. . .The legal validity of the judgment has the deontological character of a command, and not the teleological character of a desirable good that we can achieve to a certain degree under the given circumstances and within the horizon of our preferences.34

One criticism which status-based theorists would move against proportionality is that it produces a transformation in the deontology associated with human rights: "we no longer ask what is right or wrong in a human rights case but, instead, try to investigate whether something is appropriate, adequate, intensive, or far-reaching".35

Let us now turn to the positions described before as instrumentalist. Some of the theories which pass as instrumentalist cannot be characterised as consequentialist in any meaningful sense of that term. Take for example Joseph Raz's well-known theory of fundamental rights in *The Morality of Freedom*. Raz rejects the status-based accounts, and proposes a theory of fundamental rights that is grounded in important individual interests as well as in "the promotion and protection of a certain public culture . . . valued for its contribution to the well-being of members of the community".36 Interest-based theories of rights—and Raz's theory is an example, although, as we have seen, other considerations are also part of his account—need not entail the "premise that the moral logic appropriate to interests is exclusively one of aggregation";37 nor do they entail the idea of balancing competeting social benefits. An interest may, for example, be considered so fundamental as to be inviolable. The difference between an inviolable interest to free expression, to which an absolute right of free expression would correspond, and an inviolable right of free expression representing an intrinsic moral quality may not be all that substantial. The distinction between interest-based and status-based theories acquires normative significance when the interests which

- 36 Joseph Raz, *The Morality of Freedom* (Clarendon Press, 1986), 256.
<sup>33</sup> Habermas, *Between Fact and Norm*, 259. 34 Habermas, *Between Fact and Norm*, 261.

<sup>35</sup> Tsakyrakis, "Proportionality", 487.

<sup>37</sup> Tasioulas, "Human Dignity", 300.

rights are meant to serve are based on collective interests and disconnected from any individual dimension: it is one thing to justify free expression as an important individual interest (or as an important individual interest which also serves the common good); it is another to justify it because it produces positive social consequences (for example, it makes our society better by strengthening public argument or it supports democratic debate).

The idea of incommensurability also plays an important role.38 Insofar as the interests or values on which human rights are grounded include incommensurables, there can be no room for balancing. This is not to say that all incommensurables are absolutes, but the process by which we may end up determining that an incommensurable has to give way to some other principle need not be governed by proportionality and balancing. Nor does incommensurability exclude, to use Raz's words, "pockets of commensurability" within which optimization may be possible.39 There is a difference between an approach to the limitation of rights that admits of the occasional resort to consequentalist assessments in defined circumstances, and one that consists of a generalized system of consequentialist assessments aimed at the optimisation of social benefits. 40

There is of course much more to say about the theory of rights, but what I have outlined here enables us to reach two conclusions on the relationship between proportionality and the idea of human rights. The first one is that limitable rights are, in an analytical sense, weaker than absolute or limited rights. This analytical weakness will have a bearing on the kind of duties that these rights can generate. The second conclusion is that rights that are generally limitable through proportionality do not sit comfortably with liberal theories of fundamental rights. They are difficult to reconcile with both status-based theories of human rights, and most interest-based accounts. Limitable rights through general proportionality are difficult to accept for those who think that human rights have intrinsic moral value, as well as for those who think that they derive from individual interests endowed with intrinsic moral value or that they are connected to some idea of the good.

Might there not be a mid-road solution? For example, how about having two classes of human rights, one for those human rights which we think ought to be absolute or limited only in specific and narrow ways (ie, deserving protection as strong rights), and another for those human rights which we think should be subject to general proportionality (ie, deserving protection merely as weak rights)? Is there any principled reason that tells us that *only* strong rights should be characterized as fundamental rights?

<sup>38</sup> It is a central part of Raz's argument (see *The Morality of Freedom*, 321ff).

<sup>39</sup> Raz, *The Morality of Freedom*, 358.

<sup>40</sup> The importance of incommensurability may be related to the fact that "all of the familiar instrumental theories of rights rest at the deepest level on status-based rights" (Wenar, "The Value of Rights", 209). A non-inferential moral judgment about the inherent worth of the individual and of human life is common to all liberal theories of human rights. For the purposes of understanding the extent to which proportionality can be accommodated within a particular theory of rights, this commonality may actually be more significant than any difference based on the instrumentalist/non-instrumentalist classification.

Whether a particular entitlement should be protected as a strong or weak right will depend on our moral and political views. For example, a classical liberal view would consider freedom of expression to be deserving of strong right protection—limited only in specific and narrow ways, rather than limitable in a general and open-ended sense. By contrast, utilitarians would approve of freedom of expression as a limitable right, and make its enjoyment dependent on whether the right is producing concrete social advantages and offers the greater utility when balanced against competing benefits.

But what if we reject the view that the starting point for a theory of human rights should be an argument about their moral foundations? "Political" conceptions of human rights do precisely this, and suggest instead that the theory of human rights should be grounded in their practice, not least because a foundational moral theory—elusive as it already is in the domestic constitutional sphere—is not appropriate for international human rights which are intended to cover the entire globe.41 The protection of human rights in the weak limitable form does however pose a problem even in this practical-political perspective.

The crucial consideration is that the practice of human rights rests on a series of foundational claims which provide a yardstick against which subsequent developments in the practice should be assessed. These claims are normally included in the preambles of international human rights treaties. There we find various passages intended to impress upon us that human rights differ in some fundamental sense from other entitlements which the law may confer upon us. Human rights are described as the "foundation of justice and peace in the world" (preamble to the ECHR); they "derive from the inherent dignity of the human person" (preamble to the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)); failure to respect them may compel us "to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion", while "disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind" (preamble to the UDHR). These statements may not amount to a comprehensive moral theory of human rights in a philosophical sense; nor were they designed to be one. But they are not there for nothing. They occupy a special position in the practice of human rights for they identify a raison d'être.

This matters because it shows that the recognition of rights which are weak, uncertain and indeterminate as human rights is not merely an error of designation. It creates an inconsistency in the practice judged on its own standards of political justification. Those standards tell us that these rights are so fundamental that respect for them is what separates us from barbarism and war. If that is true, how can we justify making the enjoyment of some of these rights uncertain, vague and weak?

The coherence of the idea of human rights thus requires that all human rights be conceived and guaranteed as strong rights. True, on most liberal understandings of human rights, some rights, like freedom of speech or the right to free assembly, may need to "find limits" while others, like freedom from torture, should be unlimited. But, as explained earlier, both absolute and limited rights are strong rights.

<sup>41</sup> See Joseph Raz, "Human Rights Without Foundations", in S. Besson and J. Tasioulas (eds.), *The Philosophy of International Law* (Oxford University Press, 2010), 321–37.

This is not to say that our laws—domestic and perhaps international ones too—should never establish weak rights. Our social and political arrangements are complex. The relationship between the individual and the state should take different juridical forms, some putting the individual in a stronger position of entitlement than others. In the legal systems of most countries, for example, a basic distinction is drawn between fundamental rights entrenched under the constitution and statutory rights created under ordinary legislation.42

Some important individual interests are protected merely as statutory rather than constitutional rights. For example, many countries have introduced freedom of information legislation granting individuals access to government databases. This legislation rests on important principles of good governance, such as accountability and transparency. But, judged by the high moral and political standards of justification for human rights referred to before, denial of access to government information would normally fail to reach the threshold required for recognition as a human right. Important though it certainly is, access to government information is not a foundation of peace and justice; it does not derive from the inherent dignity of the individual; and disregard for it does not usually produce outrageous acts of barbarism. There may be situations, for example East Germany under the Stasi, where the collection and use of information about individuals by a government offends something more fundamental because it puts into effect a totalitarian system of social control. In these cases the sphere of fundamental rights, the right to privacy in particular, will be engaged. But, outside these exceptional circumstances, the ordinary interest of the individual in accessing government information is adequately protected as a limitable right, subject to extensive qualifications of both a general and specific nature. In the UK, for example, the specific limits are to the effect of exempting categories of information and government departments from the duty of disclosure, while the general limits are expressed in terms of proportionality and reasonableness.43

From the perspective of non-consequentialist theories, rights generally limitable through proportionality are a category error. Either they should be downgraded to ordinary statutory rights (rather than constitutional rights or international human

42 Throughout this chapter, I have treated international human rights as cognate to fundamental constitutional rights. It may be objected that entrenchment makes constitutional rights different from international human rights. There is no doubt that there are important differences between human rights contained in treaties and those found in constitutions although, in a legal system like the British one, that difference is blurred by the fact that the domestic bill of rights (ie, the Human Rights Act (HRA)) incorporates a set of international human rights *verbatim*. Even beyond the British example, however, the difference between international human rights and constitutional rights thins out when one considers their political justification: expressions very similar to those I have mentioned earlier can be found in the preambles of national constitutions. Moreover, although not entrenched in a constitutional sense, the protection of a fundamental right in an international treaty also provides an entrenchment of sort: it too seeks to protect "the basic political culture of a society" (the expression is used by Raz, *The Morality of Freedom*, 260), and does so by connecting it to a system of binding international obligations which are in practice even more difficult to amend than constitutional bills of rights.

43 See Freedom of Information Act 2000. It is also noteworthy that in some countries public and administrative law contemplates a third position, in addition to constitutional rights and statutory rights. In Italian law individual interests which are not guaranteed as constitutional or ordinary rights are described as legitimate interests, and may still attract some legal protection.

rights) or they should be upgraded to absolute or limited rights. A right that is balanceable and negotiable cannot be fundamental. These points will acquire greater force and clarity once we consider the implications that the recognition of weak limitable rights as human rights has for our public culture of rights and liberty.

## **V. Proportionality and our Public Culture of Rights and Liberty**

To advance an argument—as I am about to—on what proportionality does to our public culture of rights and liberty does not entail acceptance of a consequentialist theory of rights. The juxtaposition of liberalism and communitarianism in contemporary Anglo–American political theory has contributed to the impression that a liberal theory of human rights is by necessity predominantly or even entirely individualistic.44 It is true that some liberal theories of fundamental rights have these features, Locke's theory being an example. But a number of important thinkers spanning different liberal traditions have also linked the ideal of liberty, and the protection of basic rights which derives from it, to some version of the common good. Examples range from nineteenth-century French liberalism (for instance, Alexis de Tocqueville) to Joseph Raz's theory of freedom.

In order to understand what proportionality means for our public culture of rights and liberty, let us for a moment return to the two different ways of limiting rights discussed earlier: the *limited* right to free expression in Article 5(2) of Germany's Basic Law and the *limitable* right to free expression in Article 10(2) ECHR. Under the approach to freedom of expression as a limited right in Germany's Basic Law (albeit not necessarily as interpreted by the German Constitutional Court), a person has, for example, no right to publish paedophiliac pornography, because his right to free speech *finds a limit* there. The right terminates before that point. Under the ECHR approach to limitation, a person may have such a right *in the abstract*, but his exercise of that right will be restricted under the limitation clause.

This comparison tells us something else about the difference between limited and limitable rights, and about proportionality. Before proportionality is applied to them, limitable rights may actually be wider in scope than limited rights. This is because limitable rights begin with a wide assertion of principle (for example, "Everyone has the right to freedom of expression"), and it is only their *enjoyment* that is limited through proportionality. This two-pronged approach thus distinguishes "between the scope of the constitutional right and the extent of the right's realisation".45 A consequence of this way of formulating human rights is that their scope is, at first, generously defined in the knowledge that the exercise of the right can subsequently be restricted. Unsurprisingly, fundamental rights defined, interpreted and applied in this way become, as Alexy has written, "ubiquitous".46 But is it good for human rights to be ubiquitous?

<sup>44</sup> For a criticism of the predominant view see Will Kymlicka, *Liberalism, Community and Culture* (Clarendon Press, 1989, *reprinted* 2010).

<sup>45</sup> See, eg, Barak, *Proportionality*, 45ff.

<sup>46</sup> Alexy, "Constitutional Rights, Balancing and Rationality", 133.

If human rights are a good thing, one might think their ubiquity can be nothing other than good. But this superficially attractive position is problematic. First, ubiquity inflates and dilutes human rights.47 Individuals have many rights, but their rights are subject to the Damocles' sword of proportionality. To be entitled to these ubiquitous human rights is a bit like owning a big house burdened by a huge mortgage. It is a big asset, but it is not fully ours and can be re-possessed by the bank.

Secondly, human rights ubiquity risks generating an unhealthy public culture of rights and liberty characterized by a sequence of entitlement and disappointment: we are first told we have rights but then asked to surrender them to some competing value on the basis of a vague calculus of social benefits. Not all rights are absolute and some measure of disappointment may be necessary, but because of its centrality in human rights adjudication proportionality has generalized entitlement followed by disappointment. No less insidious is the notion of progressive realization which has acquired particular importance in the context of economic and social rights. Like balancing, progressive realization undermines the idea of human rights. On the one hand, human rights are characterized as fundamental, with disregard and contempt for them even blamed—as we have seen—for "barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind"; on the other hand, the bearers of these rights are told that their full realization can be postponed. It is tantamount to saying that something which is morally necessary is still impossible today: the state is obliged to do something of the gravest importance but it cannot yet do it. Regardless of the theoretical justifications which may be advanced to account for this incongruity between "ought" and "can",48 the public culture that results from it will be one of insatiability, disenchantment, and even cynicism.

As mentioned, human rights do not pertain exclusively to the realm of adjudication. More broadly, and perhaps even more significantly, they should be central to public argument. An approach that first inflates human rights and then limits their exercise risks bringing democratic institutions into disrepute: parliaments and governments are presumed to be abusers of rights which are initially very widely defined, although the liberty that derives from these broad definitions is neither deep nor strong.

Thirdly, the ubiquity of human rights marginalizes or suppresses other political, legal, and moral understandings of the relationships between individual, society, and state. Take an example which continues to generate controversy in the UK: prisoner voting rights. One may disagree with the predominant view in British society that a convicted criminal has for a time severed his social contract and should be punished

47 The problem of human rights proliferation is obviously related to that of their ubiquity. A study of the Freedom Rights Project counted at least 1,377 human rights provisions in 64 core human rights treaties concluded under the UN and the Council of Europe. Because of their central political and moral role, human rights should be susceptible to succinct articulation and capable of being grasped and owned by everyone, rather than only by a technocratic elite. See: Freedom Rights Projects, "Human Rights Inflation" at http://www.freedomrights.info/activities/new-frp-report-1377-human-rights/; and J. Mchangama and G. Verdirame, "The Danger of Human Rights Proliferation", *Foreign Affairs*, 24 July 2013 at [http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/139598/jacob-mchangama-and-guglielmo-verdirame/](http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/139598/jacob-mchangama-and-guglielmo-verdirame/the-danger-of-human-rights-proliferation) [the-danger-of-human-rights-proliferation](http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/139598/jacob-mchangama-and-guglielmo-verdirame/the-danger-of-human-rights-proliferation).

48 See Jeremy Waldron's discussion of the "ought"-implies-"can" question in "Rights in Conflict", *Ethics*, 99(3) (1989): 506–7. See also Tasioulas's discussion of the "threshold of possibility" (Tasioulas, "Human Dignity", 296ff).

not only with a loss of personal liberty but also with a temporary deprivation of his political rights. There may be good non-human rights arguments in support of prisoner voting rights—for example, their exercise contributes to the civic education of individuals whom society is punishing now but will one day have to reintegrate—but the articulation of the case in human rights terms has a "crowding out effect" on these arguments; or, to use more familiar language, it trumps them and, by doing so, it impoverishes public argument on this issue. Here too there is a risk of a dangerous disconnect between the law of human rights, and widespread social understandings of them.49

The idea of proportionality, as developed by courts and by its enthusiastic supporters among legal scholars, is at the heart of the problems about human rights which I have set out in this chapter. In particular, it is because they know that balancing is around the corner that judges and lawyers have been prepared to recognize an ever wider range of situations as engaging fundamental human rights. In this process both legal and public argument about rights has often become sloppy and simplistic.50 Here I differ from Letsas in that my view is that doctrinal writings, even when "vacuous" and "unsophisticated",51 may still matter a great deal, as they both reflect and shape the application of the law by the courts. At its best, legal doctrine acts as a bridge between legal theory and judicial practice. At its worst it corrupts both. In this context, it is worth mentioning in passing a recent but related trend that has emerged in the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights: the doctrine of "dividing and tailoring" the rights protected under the Convention when they are applied extraterritorially in an armed conflict.52 The contours of this doctrine are still undefined: it is not clear on what basis and for what reasons human rights should be divided and tailored. But this idea, in its generality and vagueness, echoes proportionality and might perhaps take it to an even more dangerous level.

49 On this point, see eg Justice O' Connor's dissenting opinion in *Roper v. Simmons*, 543 U.S. 551 (2005). The issue was whether the Court should overrule its precedents and develop a new interpretation of the Eighth Amendment to the effect that it prohibits the imposition of the death penalty on seventeen-year old murderers. Justice O' Connor explained that she "would demand a clearer showing that our society truly has set its face against this practice before reading the Eighth Amendment categorically to forbid it."

50 An admittedly extreme example of such sloppiness in argument is a debate which took place at the end of 2013 in Britain on the question of how universities should respond to an external speaker requesting that male and female members of the audience be seated separately. The organization which represents British Universities, Universities UK, adopted its guidance on this issue after going through extensive internal consultations and after obtaining a legal opinion from a QC. The legal advice was that the case involved a conflict between the speaker's rights to freedom of expression and religious belief, and the right to freedom of association "of those who do not wish to be segregated while hearing a particular speaker," and that the issue was one of balancing these competing interests (See the Opinion of Fenella Morris QC, [http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Documents/2013/](http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Documents/2013/ExternalSpeakersLegalOpinion.pdf) [ExternalSpeakersLegalOpinion.pdf](http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Documents/2013/ExternalSpeakersLegalOpinion.pdf)). This Opinion obviously confused the liberty to manifest religious beliefs or express opinions, and the power to impose restrictions on others. A guest speaker is entitled to believe that women should sit separately or dress modestly. But only a perverse understanding of human rights would justify the view that a speaker's rights would potentially be violated by a university which refuses to enforce his beliefs on others.

51 Letsas, "Rescuing Proportionality", 324ff.

52 *Al-Skeini and others v. the United Kingdom*, para 137, cited with approval by the UK Supreme Court in *Smith and Others (FC) v. The Ministry of Defence*, 2013 UKSC 41, para 45.

## **VI. Conclusion**

One notable exception to the success of proportionality is the United States. There the idea of balancing was "tested in the context of a powerful right—freedom of speech—and was found problematic as a method of adjudication".53 This is not to say that US law has no place whatsoever for proportionality but crucially—and notwithstanding growing support among some academics and also among judges (like Justice Bryer)—proportionality has not been adopted by the US Supreme Court "as a constitutional concept which can stand on its own and which applies in different fields of the Bill of Rights".54

Outside the US the spread of proportionality seems almost irresistible. It has been argued that proportionality may be a code-word for something else—for example, a right to equal respect and concern in dealings with the public authorities.55 However, the principle of equal respect and concern in dealings with the public authorities is covered by other principles like equality and non-discrimination. I do not see what, descriptively or prescriptively, proportionality can add.

In conclusion, I do not think there is anything to rescue in the doctrine of proportionality. Proportionality has an important role to play in many areas of public and administrative law, but the idea of fundamental rights is to protect, as far as possible, a select group of entitlements from other considerations—be they utility, convenience or public interest. There will be exceptional circumstances where fundamental rights will have to give way to these considerations. But if we allow them to encroach upon fundamental rights in an almost open-ended way, we will have downgraded fundamental rights to a different status. As we have seen, there may be pockets of proportionality even in the application of fundamental rights, but general proportionality is a different matter.

The only reason I can see for attempting to rescue proportionality is tactical. A doctrine which has so successfully penetrated the legal universe is not likely to vanish any time soon. The force of precedent counts. Moreover, as far as the ECHR is concerned, we are stuck with regrettable formulations which protect some of the most important rights only in a weak way and subject to wide-ranging consequentialist limitations: a case for abridging rights will often be at least arguable under those provisions. The Convention was, in other words, infected with utilitarianism even before judges began to interpret it. As far as legal doctrine goes, there may thus be a case for seeking to infuse a better spirit into proportionality. But, as far as a normative theory of rights and our public culture of rights are concerned, we are much better off without it.

<sup>53</sup> Tsakyrakis, "Proportionality", 7ff.

<sup>54</sup> Barak, *Proportionality*, 207. See also E.T. Sullivan and R. S. Frase, *Proportionality Principles in American Law: Controlling Excessive Government Actions* (Oxford University Press, 2009).

<sup>55</sup> See Letsas, "Rescuing Porportionality", 311ff.