---
title: "Human Rights in Kantian Mode: A Sketch"
author:
  - name: "Katrin Flikschuh"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "653–670"
citation_key: "flikschuh2015kantian"
---

## <span id="page-667-0"></span> [Human Rights in Kantian Mode](#page-9-4)

## A Sketch

#### *Katrin Flikschuh*

#### **I. Reservations about Human Rights**

Many legal and political theorists think the idea of human rights intuitive and their moral and political importance self-evident. Others worry that the concept is badly delimited and human rights' moral and political appeal overrated. In current human rights relevant debates, the latter are the reservations of a dwindling minority. Philosophical discussions about global poverty alleviation, about state legitimacy, about international law and humanitarian intervention make ubiquitous appeal to human rights: the idea plays an increasingly central conceptual and justificatory role in these and related debates.

In general, recurrent appeal to a single concept as solvent to a diverse range of theoretical and practical problems should be treated with caution. The increasingly routine appeal to human rights in global justice debates is particularly disconcerting given that debate's acknowledged state of flux following nearly five hundred years of sophisticated political theorizing firmly *within* the boundaries of the self-contained territorial state. Under conditions of such comprehensive change and uncertainty appeal to all-too-readily available practical or theoretical remedies seems ill-advised. The very allure of human rights theorizing here counsels circumspection with regard to their possible illusionary quality as quick fixes to complex global problems we confront.1

Since my brief here concerns human rights, I shall not simply set them aside. Still, everything I say here should be read in the light of the reservations just noted. I have a strong sense of my *lack* of grasp of the concept: whenever I try to think it, I overwhelmingly sense my confusion. Admittedly, one cannot easily call to mind concepts 'as such'—in abstraction, that is, from their discursive employment in some context. My confusion in trying to think the concept may merely reflect my bewilderment over its currently ubiquitous usage. Still, insofar as a concept's use at least partly determines its meaning, confusion about use may be indicative of confusion about meaning.2

Following Henry Allison's sketch of Kant's notion of a concept in general, I shall here think of a concept as consisting of 'a set of marks (themselves concepts), which

<sup>1</sup> cf Onora O'Neill, 'The Dark Side of Human Rights', *International Affairs*, 81 (2005): 427–39; Samuel Moyn, *The Last Utopia: Human Rights in History* (Harvard University Press, 2010).

<sup>2</sup> Contrast Charles Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights* (Oxford University Press, 2009) who believes that a coherent theoretical conception of human rights can be derived from observing and interpreting current human rights practice.

are thought together in an "analytic unity" and which can serve as a ground for the recognition of objects. These marks collectively constitute the intension of a concept. One concept is "contained in another" if and only if it is itself either a mark of the concept or a mark of a mark'.3 On this sketch, which Allison offers in the wider context of his discussion of Kantian analyticity, a concept is a cognitive construct made up of a plurality of other concepts that together specify the concept's semantic content, delimiting it from other, neighbouring concepts.4 Concepts, on this account, are neither ready-made 'thought entities' nor abstractions from empirically perceived objects they are conclusions, rather, of subjects' cognitive judgements of sensible intuitions as objects of experience in accordance with certain rules of cognition.5 As such, any given concept consists of (or 'contains') that which it is *thought* to contain by the judging subject in accordance with specified rules of judgement or cognition. Assuming human knowers' finite cognitive capacities and fallibility in judgement in general, concepts as cognitive constructs can have varying levels of semantic determination. We may not always be wholly confident as to which marks we take a given concept to contain. We think of the boundaries of some concepts as more fuzzily delimited (or delimitable) than those of others.6 Precisely what we take to be 'contained in' a given concept may shift with different usage over time. My claim is not that the concept of human rights can or must be rendered fully perspicacious;7 my claim is merely that we must acknowledge the concept's necessary boundedness. No concept, if it is to be intelligibly employed in some contexts is intelligibly employable in all contexts, and no concept the set of constitutive marks of which serves to delimit it from neighbouring concepts can accommodate an infinite number of such marks.

Some of a concept's constituent marks may be taken to specify its core meaning. Other marks are less central but lie nonetheless comfortably within the concept's boundary. Yet others are peripheral, lying at or beyond a concept's boundary. Take the concept of a chair: its constitutive marks include 'four-legged structure', 'raised

3 Henry Allison, *Kant's Transcendental Idealism. An Interpretation and Defense* (Yale University Press, 1983), 76.

4 Allison goes on to suggest that what he calls Kant's 'thoroughly intensional' conception of analyticity, 'depends on the fixity of a concept', ie, on 'the thesis that the marks of a concept can be sufficiently determined (even without an explicit definition) for the purpose of analysis.' In this, he concurs with Lewis White Beck's earlier study of Kantian analyticity in 'Can Kant's synthetic judgements be made analytic?', *Kant-Studien* (1956). I am not myself persuaded that Kant *is* committed to the 'fixity thesis' the view that he is seems to me to depend on the rejection of what Allison and Beck call Kant's 'phenomenological' criterion of analyticity, according to which judgements of conceptual containment are based on mere introspection: 'we reflect on what is "actually thought" in a given concept'. The subjectivist connotations of the phenomenological reading lead both Allison and Beck to favour what they take to be an alternative 'logical' criterion of analyticity—ie, the principle of contradiction. My own view is that the two criteria are not mutually exclusive: the phenomenological criterion tells against the 'fixity thesis' and in conjunction with the logical criterion implies a conception of analyticity as objectively rule governed though substantively fallible human judgement.

5 cf Alison, *Kant's Transcendental Idealism*, esp. 63–130. See also Beatrice Longuenesse, *Kant and the Capacity to Judge* (Princeton University Press, 2000), esp. 81–130.

6 cf Kant, *Critique of Pure Reason*, 'The knowledge of appearances in their complete determination, which is possible only through the understanding, demands an *endless progress in the specification of our concepts*, and an advance to *yet further remaining differences*. . . ' (A656 / B684, emphasis added).

7 Contrast James Griffin, 'First Steps in an Account of Human Rights', *European Journal of Philosophy*, 9 (2001): 306–27.

seating surface', 'back rest', and so on. If we take 'raised seating surface' to specify its core meaning, we may think of 'back rest' as occupying a less central but still non-marginal position. By contrast, 'armrests' lies at or outside the concept's boundary. One can meaningfully debate whether or not a given object with a raised seating surface, a back-rest and armrests can legitimately count as an instance of the concept of a chair. However, such boundary disputes make sense only on the presumption of concepts' boundedness in general.

In contrast to empirical concepts, practical concepts (including moral concepts) are not restricted to the constraints of the physical world. This may make them more liable to conceptual contestation. The practical concept of happiness, for example, may or may not be taken to contain semantic marks like 'heightened emotional well-being', 'a feeling of personal contentment', 'at-one-ness with the world'. Each is a plausible candidate for either inclusion or exclusion—if included, each is liable to being arrayed either more towards the core or towards the boundary of the concept. Again, however, there has to be some boundary and hence some *exclusions*—if only to differentiate 'happiness' from neighbouring concepts, such as 'pleasure' or 'joy'.

The practical concept of human rights appears at times to be treated as infinitely capacious and capable of accommodating a wide array of psycho–physiological, valuebased, and deontological marks, including marks relating to physical and psychological features of personhood, marks that pick out particular values, such as agential autonomy or individual well-being, and marks that specify interpersonal constraints, such as human dignity or respect for personhood. In confessing my confusion when trying to 'think the concept' I mean that I find it difficult mentally to represent this diversity of constitutive marks in the unity of a single concept.

If pressed, I would place some marks closer to the concept's core than others: deontological marks associated with negative rights language over the value marks of positive rights language. Granted, the negative / positive distinction is itself contested; growing numbers of theorists make the case for the equal inclusion of negative and positive rights;8 some perhaps even prioritize positive over negative rights.9 Still, most human rights advocates who invoke what they take to be central features of Kant's moral philosophy as the justificatory basis of their favoured human rights conceptions—human dignity, respect for the humanity in persons, capacity for moral autonomy—acknowledge that these features' deontological orientation tends to support negative rather than positive rights conceptions.

I do not believe that Kant himself possessed the concept of a human right.10 If we nonetheless *must* have a Kantian conception of contemporary human rights—and

10 Kant does invoke terms such as 'das Recht der Menschheit', or das 'Recht der Menschen'. However, he does not deploy these terms consistently or systematically, and he nowhere develops an explicit theory

<sup>8</sup> Most notably by Henry Shue, *Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and US Foreign Policy* (Princeton University Press, 1980). See also Elizabeth Ashford, 'The Duties Imposed by the Human Right to Basic Necessities', in Thomas Pogge (ed.), *Freedom from Poverty as a Human Right* (Oxford University Press, 2007), 183–218. Likewise, one might add, with the traditional distinction between deontological and teleological morality, to which I shall nonetheless simply help myself here. But see Barbara Herman, 'Leaving Deontology Behind', in her *The Practice of Moral Judgment* (Harvard University Press 1994), 208–42.

<sup>9</sup> As Simon Hope has pointed out to me, this may be especially true of virtue–ethical human rights accounts. See, eg, Martha Nussbaum, 'Capabilities and Human Rights', *Fordham Law Review*, 66 (1997): 273–300.

I am not myself persuaded that we must—we should seek to develop one that is plausibly consistent with the general contours of Kant's philosophical thinking. In what follows, I sketch what I call a *transcendent* human rights conception, the distinguishing feature of which I take to be its acknowledgement of human cognitive and moral fallibility. On the transcendent human rights conception I propose, to invoke the idea of human rights is to acknowledge the limits of human moral understanding and political authority: from a Kantian perspective, the idea is humbling rather than empowering.11

I build my case for a transcendent human rights conception indirectly, ie, by rejecting as a plausible interpretive basis Kant's obscure though increasingly popular juridical category of innate right in his *Doctrine of Right*. In an ironic twist of philosophical fate, the innate right of each is coming to be treated by many as a proto-natural right that serves Kant as 'foundational pillar' for his theory of positive rights: Kant, the erstwhile constructivist is fast coming to be transformed in contemporary normative debates as Kant, the rights-foundationalist.12 This new interpretative trend makes it tempting to go one step further and to gloss the foundationally interpreted innate right to freedom as a pre-legal human right. I believe we should resist this temptation: partly because it is so obviously inconsistent with Kant's philosophical

of human rights. In general, Kant's invocation of notions such as 'das Recht der Menschheit' tends to have collective, not individualistic connotations and is better translated as a 'right of humanity' rather than as 'a human right'.

11 In the *Critique of Pure Reason*, Kant refers to what I here call 'transcendent concepts' as 'transcendental ideas': these are 'empty' thought constructs, which are generated through the 'problematic extension' of pure concepts (categories) of the understanding beyond the sensibly given conditions of their application. In the Transcendental Dialectic of the first *Critique*, Kant argues that the human tendency to extend the categories of the understanding beyond sensibly given conditions of experience is indicative of the search for first causes, ie, of the search for the unconditioned first ground of all conditional knowledge. Though Kant critiques this tendency and rejects the attendant rationalist metaphysics, which he thinks the search for an unconditioned first cause gives rise to, he eventually assigns transcendent(al) ideas a critical, reflective status according to which they do not constitute legitimate knowledge claims as such but may guide our wider reflections on the systematizing form and teleological orientation of human experience. Kant's use of his terminology is not, however, consistent; what is more, the term 'transcendental' is often, in contemporary debates, invoked rather loosely to refer to anything minddependent. I have here decided to stick with the terms 'transcendent' in part because I prefer to reserve the term 'transcendental' for Kantian categories of the understanding; unlike the latter, transcendent ideas of reason are not necessary conditions of the possibility of human cognitive experience. In contrast to 'transcendental', 'transcendent' retains the connotations of a mind-independent, supersensible order of things. Although Kant unambiguously rejects our possible knowledge of such an order and of the items it may or may not contain, he nonetheless defends the thought of the possibility of such an order. In retaining the notion of 'transcendence' I want to draw attention to the Kantian thought of the possibility of such an order, though not thereby endorsing any unKantian assumptions about its knowability.

12 See, eg, Louis-Phillippe Hodgson, 'Kant on the Right to Freedom: A Defense', *Ethics*, 120 (2010): 791–819; also Anna Stilz, 'Nations, States, and Territory', *Ethics*, 121 (2011): 572–601. The general trend towards the casual attribution of rights-foundationalism to Kant is exemplified in the contributions to a recent book symposium on Arthur Ripstein's *Force and Freedom* in the *European Journal of Philosophy*, 20 (2012). In her contribution, Laura Valentini asserts the innate right as the 'pillar' of Kant's *Doctrine of Right*; Andrea Sangiovanni speaks of the innate right as the 'load-bearing foundation' of Kant's property argument. See also Ripstein's understandable terse response, though in fairness to his commentators, Ripstein's own somewhat ambivalent treatment of innate right in *Force and Freedom* does invite foundationalist interpretations of it. For some reservations in this regard, see Katrin Flikschuh, 'A Regime of Equal Private Freedom? Individual Rights and Public Law in Ripstein's *Force and Freedom*', in Sari Kisilevsky and Martin Stone (eds.), *Freedom and Force: Essays on Kant's Legal Philosophy* (Hart Publishing, forthcoming).

non-foundationalism; partly because it fails to tell us anything about human rights that we could not just as easily derive from Lockean rights premises instead.

I begin by setting out Kant's division of the domain of ordinary morality in general, treating his systematic approach as emblematic of his general philosophical non-foundationalism. I then sketch a non-foundationalist interpretation of innate Right before turning to the idea of human rights as a critically transcendent idea of pure practical (moral) reasoning. I close with some remarks on what I take to be distinctive about the proposed transcendent human rights conception.

## **II. Structuring the Field of Morality in General**

When Kantians consider the concept of human rights, they usually incline towards a negative rights conception: rights as some sort of side-constraints on others' actions.13 This does not make them closet libertarians. Kantians generally regard duties as conceptually prior to rights. While for libertarians (and for most liberal egalitarians, too), rights *entail* corresponding duties, Kantians generally think of rights as *grounded* in duties.14 The current emphasis on the 'second-personal' or 'relational' structure of Kantian moral reasoning is a gloss on the justificatory priority of the concept of duty over the concept of a right.15 Kant's property argument, for example, construes a person's right to a particular object of her choice as grounded in another's duty to refrain from using the object without her consent.16 Insofar as rights are grounded in duties there can be no *natural* rights for Kant—not, if by 'natural' one means the predication of innate powers or entitlements to persons independently of their coexistence with others. From a Kantian perspective, to say that a person's rights are side-constraints on others' actions is not to say that persons are endowed with innate powers that give others reason to abstain from certain types of action against them. It is to say, rather, that others have (coercible) duties of restraint in action towards them.

Rights specify only one type of duty. Kant distinguishes between juridical and ethical duties.17 The former are sometimes glossed as 'perfect' and the latter as 'imperfect'—although there is growing doubt about the felicity of superimposing the earlier perfect / imperfect distinction upon the later distinction between juridical and ethical duties.18 One reason for thinking of juridical as perfect duties may be that Kant takes juridical duties to hold without exception. However, under at least one description of 'exception-less validity'—unconditional validity—he evidently assumes the same of

17 See Kant's table of duties in the *Metaphysics of Morals*, 6: 240.

<sup>13</sup> cf Robert Nozick, *Anarchy, State, and Utopia* (Blackwell Publishers, 1975).

<sup>14</sup> The precise contours of the derivation of rights from duties remains obscure; rights may ultimately be grounded in duties towards the self. cf Bernd Ludwig, 'Die Einteilung der Metaphysik der Sitten im Allgemeinen und die der Tugendlehre im Besonderen', in A. Trempton, O. Sensen, and J. Timmermann (eds.), *Kants Tugendlehre* (Berlin: de Gruyter 2103), 59–84.

<sup>15</sup> cf Stephen Darwall, *The Second Person Standpoint. Morality, Respect and Accountability* (Harvard University Press, 2006); Arthur Ripstein, *Force and Freedom. Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy* (Harvard University Press, 2009).

<sup>16</sup> This (*a priori*) presupposition morally necessitates common entrance into the civil condition. cf Katrin Flikschuh, *Kant and Modern Political Philosophy* (Cambridge University Press, 2000), 113–43.

<sup>18</sup> cf Marcus Willaschek, 'Why the Doctrine of Right does not Belong in a Metaphysics of Morals: On some Basic Distinctions in Kant's Moral Philosophy', *Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik*, 5 (1997): 205–27.

ethical duties. Perhaps more pertinently, juridical duties, unlike ethical duties, leave no room for discretion in individual judgement but must be determined 'with mathematical exactitude'.19 Relatedly, juridical duties impose constraints on persons' actions without requiring the adoption of moral ends. By contrast, ethical duties prescribe the adoption of particular moral ends, including the furtherance of others' happiness. Ethical duties allow for latitude in judgement *because* furtherance of others' happiness requires resources of the requisite kind; it requires an adequate understanding of relevant others' happiness conceptions and, correspondingly, judgements about one's ability and indeed one's moral authority to assist particular others.20

Although many non-Kantians find it hard to resist the thought that perfect duties of right are somehow more stringent than imperfect duties of virtue, this in fact makes little sense: all duties are unconditionally binding; juridical and ethical duties merely bind in different ways. Duties of justice are externally binding; duties of virtue bind internally. Internal bindingness is related to the adoption of moral ends. To adopt a moral end is to make it one's maxim to act in furtherance of this end: it requires one to *will* the end in question. Since no one can compel another autonomously to will a moral end, duties of virtue are not externally enforceable. Yet the mere fact that one cannot be externally compelled to adopt a moral end hardly makes duties of virtue less weighty. To the contrary, self-binding of the requisite kind—autonomous willing—is in many respects *more* demanding of the agent than is conformity with duties of right, for which mere outward conformity of action is sufficient.

The external enforceability of juridical duties is a function in turn not of their greater intrinsic weightiness but of the reciprocal structure of Kantian rights relations. Rights are reciprocally valid claims to the legitimate restriction of one another's 'power of choice': I cannot by rights bind you to more than you can bind me in turn. The problem with reciprocally valid rights claims is their mutual non-enforceability. While the validity of my rights claim against you depends on my reciprocal acknowledgement of your equally valid rights claim against me, my acknowledgement of your equally valid rights claim against me renders illegitimate my unilateral restriction of your power of choice by mine (and vice versa). This stalemate is resolvable only through common entrance into the civil condition, including submission under a public coercive authority with the power externally to constrain the capacity for choice of all in accordance with universal law.

In the present context, the important point to note is the fact *that* Kantian morality is structured into these two distinct but coeval and complementary domains of duty. Neither domain is either logically or morally prior to the other—a Kantian agent can be virtuous in the pre-civil condition (which is a condition devoid of justice); he can be just though non-virtuous in the civil condition (as virtue is non-coercible). Deficiencies in the one domain cannot be compensated for by greater exertion in the other: excess in virtue cannot make up for lack of justice.21 The two domains are systematically

<sup>19</sup> Kant, *The Metaphysics of Morals*, 6:233.

<sup>20</sup> On the non-reducibility of Kantian ethical duties to Kantian juridical duties, see Onora O'Neill, *Towards Justice and Virtue. A Constructive Account of Practical Reasoning* (Cambridge University Press, 1996), esp. 154–212.

<sup>21</sup> For more extensive discussion, see Katrin Flikschuh. 'Justice without Virtue', in Lara Denis (ed.), *Kant's Metaphysics of Morals. A Critical Guide* (Cambridge University Press, 2010), 51–70.

#### *Katrin Flikschuh* 659

delimited from each other but relate horizontally rather hierarchically to one another. Of course, the distinction between justice and virtue does not originate with Kant. Nonetheless, the systematic nature of Kant's division of ordinary morality into these two coeval, complementary, yet conceptually distinct domains has counterintuitive implications that routinely cause consternation. The strictly reciprocal structure of rights relations prevents Kantians from according rights to children, for example. The exclusion of substantive ends from the juridical domain lends his philosophy of Right a seemingly 'libertarian' character (though Kant is hardly a 'minimalist' about the state!). The characterization of ethical as imperfect duties is suggestive of a kind of moral voluntarism that places them in the neighbourhood of supererogation. And so on. Kant's systematizing penchant is frequently seen as preventing us from following our moral intuitions where they should naturally lead us. For many, these counterintuitive implications are evidence of Kant's moral rigorism.22

It is not, however, Kant's moral rigorism so much as his philosophical nonfoundationalism that constrains Kant to proceed systematically.23 His philosophical strategy invariably begins from uncontested experiential premises and proceeds to a vindication of the necessary grounds of their possibility. The deduction of the categories of the understanding in the first *Critique*, which begins from our experience of objects, is the most prominent example. Yet *Groundwork* in fact adopts a similar strategy, starting from our 'ordinary' concept of duty and regressing from there to its necessary presuppositions before attempting their critical vindication. The structure of the *Doctrine of Right* is more obscure. But it, too, begins from the concept of right as employed in ordinary juridical practice and proceeds from there, via the notoriously torturous property argument, to an analysis and vindication of the necessary conditions of its practical possibility.24

Note the absence in this critical strategy of foundational premises of either a realist or an empiricist provenance: first-order moral truths, rock-bottom intuitions, generalizable human interests. My contention is that it is the absence of possible reliance on foundationalist premises that leads Kant to the systematization of ordinary moral experience instead. To illustrate briefly, consider a passage in 'What is Orientation in Thinking?' in which Kant draws an analogy with spatial orientation:

In the dark, I can find my orientation in a familiar room so long as I am able to recall the location of a single object. In determining the location [of remaining objects] I rely solely on a subjective principle of differentiation [ie my subjective sense of left and right]: for I cannot see the objects whose position I seek to determine. If, to play a trick on me, someone had re-arranged the order of objects, placing to the left what before was to the right, I would be unable to find my orientation in [this] room.25

<sup>22</sup> A careful (and amusing) dissection and rebuttal of the rigorism charge can be found in Jens Timmermann, 'Alles Halb so Schlimm: Bemerkungen zu Kants ethischem Rigorismus', in Achim Stephan and Klaus Peter Rippe (eds.), *Ethik ohne Dogmen* (Mentis Verlag, 2001), 8–82.

<sup>23</sup> I am much indebted here to Karl Ameriks' nuanced and insightful defense of Kant's 'modest system' in *Kant and the Fate of Autonomy* (Cambridge University Press, 2000), esp. 37–80.

<sup>24</sup> On the distinctiveness of Kant's strategy of philosophical justification in general, see Dieter Henrich's by now classic, 'Kant's Notion of a Deduction and the Methodological Background of the First Critique', in Eckart Foerster (ed.), *Kant's Transcendental Deductions* (Stanford University Press, 1989), 29–46.

<sup>25</sup> Kant, 'What is Orientation in Thinking?', 8: 135, my translation.

Absent objectively given first principles, I must rely on a 'subjective principle of differentiation'—in the case at hand, my subjective bodily awareness of left and right—the fallibility of which I must acknowledge. If by means of it I can locate one object, I can locate the remainder relative to it. The entire reconstruction remains provisional, however—permanently subject to possible error and correction. Philosophical orientation in the field of morality proceeds similarly. Absent foundational premises, it can only begin from subjective moral experience: say, of the concept of duty. It proceeds from there to the determination of neighbouring concepts—the concept of right, say. The determination of the one is relative to that of the other; the absence of an assured objectively fixed starting point entails the permanently provisional nature of philosophical determination. Kant's systematic divisions are not a reflection of his moral rigorism. To the contrary, given his non-foundationalism, he *cannot* appeal to absolute standards of right and wrong. Systematic division is a response to the non-availability of first principles or rock bottom intuitions.26 Yet to systematize is nonetheless to introduce divisions and distinctions, which impose constraints. If we specify the concept of right as pertaining to a strictly reciprocal relation between persons, this precludes the ascription of rights responsibilities to moral minors. This does not mean that obligations towards moral minors cannot be accommodated elsewhere within our moral system: but they cannot be located within the domain of rights. To systematize is establish order through a process inclusion and exclusion on the basis of specified criteria. Unless this is accepted, systematic division is pointless.27

If I were to be asked, in light of the systematic division between right and virtue as outlined, where within this provisionally delimited Kantian system of morals I would locate the concept of human rights, I would locate it somewhere in the domain of juridical duties. A whole slew of Kantian duties—duties of virtue—would by this move alone be rendered out of bounds for human rights reasoning. I am not troubled by this: ethical duties are accommodated elsewhere in Kant's system. But where in the field of juridical duties more precisely would I locate human rights? Somewhere, I think, *beyond* the reach of any possible substantive rights legislation. It is this thought of a right beyond substantively legislated rights that I shall explore over the next two sections, beginning with the innate right to freedom of each.

### **III. Rights Beyond Legislation: Innate Right**

There is mention of one right in the *Doctrine of Right* that may be said to be 'beyond' any positive rights legislation: the innate right to freedom of each. It is tempting to interpret the innate right of each as a foundational freedom right from which all other

27 Simon Hope has helpfully pressed the issue of arbitrariness on me in this connection: absent a stated justificatory ground, Kant's specification of rights relations as strictly reciprocal strikes him as arbitrary. Why should rights relation be restricted to moral relations between moral equals? One might offer various justificatory reasons: equal capacity for choice, say, or equal capacity for liability for action. But one might also say—and I am increasingly inclined to say—that the Kantian restriction of rights relations to relations between moral equals is justified by the fact that it (a) picks out a distinctive form of moral relation, and (b) does not preclude the accommodation of other forms of moral relation within neighbouring domains of morality.

<sup>26</sup> cf Ameriks, *Kant and the Fate of Autonomy*.

rights are derived. It is tempting further to declare Kant's innate right as a foundational human right, moral commitment to which underwrites all subsequently legislated positive rights. My aim in this section is to show that there is good *systematic* reason to resist these temptations. I shall sketch a summary account of a possible, attenuated sense in which innate right may be said to be 'above' or 'beyond' positive rights legislation without therefore being most plausibly dubbed a 'human right'. It will be necessary to engage in some amount of textual footwork, though I shall try to keep it to a minimum.

The Introduction to the *Doctrine of Right* distinguishes between innate and acquired right. The former refers to a class of rights that requires no prior act but that each is said to have 'innately'. In fact, there is only one innate right—the right to freedom of each in accordance with a universal law. By contrast, acquired right refers to a class of rights for the establishment of which an action is required—an act of acquisition, as it turns out. (Kant subsequently goes on to specify three classes of acquired right, but this is immaterial to the present discussion.)

It is by now widely agreed that the moral justification of acquired right depends, for Kant, on the institution of a system of public law-giving. The status of innate right, by contrast, is considerably murkier. Recently, an interpretive trend has begun to establish itself that treats the innate right of each as a quasi-natural right, ie, as an independently given, substantively specifiable freedom premise that serves as 'pillar' or 'load bearing foundation' in relation to Kant's ensuing justification of property rights.28 The result is a curious interpretive half-way house that combines the assumption of a *foundational* freedom right with the acknowledged *public* right condition of Kant's property argument. The difficulty with such readings is two-fold. First, the assumption of a foundational right within the *Doctrine of Right* is question-begging not just in the usual sense of owing us (rather than supplying) an account of such a right's supposed provenance, but also in the more specific sense of owing us an account of the intelligibility of foundationalist premises of this kind within the methodological constraints of Kant's general philosophical non-foundationalism. Second, though less important in the present context, the dual justification of property rights by means of resort to both foundationalist rights assumptions and public right conditions muddies the waters in any attempt to differentiate clearly between Lockean and Kantian rights justification. For reasons just sketched, my chief concern here is with the first worry, ie, with the foundationalist reading of innate right. I want to block foundationalist readings of innate Right and their likely slide into human rights claims by offering an alternative, non-foundationalist interpretation of innate right, though given the textual work required I can here only sketch my alternative account.29

If we do reject rights foundationalism in relation to innate right, we face an interpretive puzzle. The innate right to freedom is explicitly mentioned only once in the text, namely, in the Introduction. The main body of the text is concerned with the

<sup>28</sup> See n 12.

<sup>29</sup> The following paragraphs are a highly condensed summary of my interpretation of the status of innate right in Katrin Flikschuh, 'Originally Mine? Innate and Acquired Right in Kant's Doctrine of Right' (manuscript). See also Flikschuh, 'A Regime of Equal Private Freedom?'

moral possibility of property rights. The Introduction sets out a number of preliminaries, including the exposition of the general concept of right, the related universal principle of right and, finally, the innate right to freedom of each. Thus,

[t]he concept of right, insofar as it is related to an obligation corresponding to it (i.e., the moral concept of right), has to do, *first*, only with the external and indeed practical relation of one person to another. . .But *second*, it does not signify the relation of one's choice to the mere wish of the other, but only in relation to the other's *choice. Third*, in this reciprocal relation of choice no account at all is taken of the *matter* of choice. . . .All that is in question is the *form* in the relation of choice on the part of both. . .30

On this specification, the general concept of right pertains to a formal, external, strictly reciprocal moral relation between (two or more) persons. From this *moral* concept Kant derives, in conjunction with a universalizing rule, the universal principle of Right, which sets out the conditions of the moral rightness of actions in general:

Any action is right if it can coexist with everyone's freedom of each in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the freedom of choice of each is consistent with the freedom of each in accordance with a universal law.

In conjunction with a distributive rule, the universal principle of Right yields a statement, in the form of innate right, of the formal moral status of each who is subject to it:

Freedom (independence from being constrained by another's choice), insofar as it can coexist with the freedom of every other in accordance with a universal law, is the only original right belonging to every man by virtue of his humanity.31

The entire Introduction can thus be said to offer an extended *analytic* exposition of what is implied by the general concept of right conceived as a *moral* concept. Kant moves from a specification of the form of a rights relation in general to the condition of its universalizability and from there to a specification of the formal moral status of each person who is subject to that principle.

Admittedly, Kant is not at all clear about the analytic status of the remarks in the Introduction.32 What is more, having introduced the innate right of each, having contrasted it with acquired right, and having listed, in a further dense paragraph, the 'authorizations' said to attach to innate right 'as not really distinct from it',33 Kant abruptly announces that the innate right 'can be put in the prolegomena and *the division of the doctrine of right can refer only to what is externally mine or yours*', ie, only to acquired right. This is a baffling announcement. Given its elaborate introduction in the Introduction, what justifies the innate right's unceremonious exclusion from the main text?

32 cf Allen Wood, 'The Final Form of Kant's Practical Philosophy', in Mark Timmons (ed.), *The Metaphysics of Morals. Interpretive Essays* (Oxford University Press, 2002), 1–34.

33 An attentive reader will see that these 'authorizations' essentially set out aspects of person's equality in formal juridical status: formal equality before the law, the quality of being one's own master, hence of being legally responsible for one's own actions, the quality of not being held responsible for actions one did not commit.

<sup>30</sup> Kant, *The Metaphysics of Morals*, 6: 230. 31 Kant, *Metaphysics of Morals*, 6: 230.

Elsewhere I propose a reading according to which the innate right cannot form part of the division of a doctrine of rights because it functions as a formal *a priori* necessary presupposition of any substantive rights doctrine.34 On this account, the analytic argument in the Introduction sets out the formal moral presuppositions, which the justification of substantive property claims in the main text has indirect recourse to. Given its status as a formal *presupposition* of morally valid substantive rights claims in general, the innate right cannot itself be an object of substantive rights legislation: hence its exclusion from the substantive argument in the main text. Nonetheless, no substantive rights legislation is conceivable that does not acknowledge the formal equality in status (the innate right to freedom) of each as the formal condition of its moral legitimacy.

Consider the innate right's function as formal presupposition of morally valid property claims.35 Anyone who raises the claim of a property right against others in so doing invokes the general concept of right: he declares all others to be under an obligation henceforth to refrain from further use of the object without his consent. To invoke right as a moral concept is, however, to acknowledge its universal validity as a concept, which if it applies to one, applies to all. Accordingly, anyone who claims a right against others is subject to reciprocal rights constraints in relation to his addressees. The claimant must acknowledge that any rights claims he raises against others are reciprocally binding for him in relation to them. This acknowledgement of rights reciprocity implies in turn that the claimant presupposes the equal status as possible rights bearers of all those against whom he raises his claim. But the innate right of each affirms no more than the equality in formal juridical status of all who are subject to the universal principle of right. Hence persons who raise substantive rights claims against others can justifiably do so under the universal principle of Right only under the presupposition of their reciprocal acknowledgement of others' formal equality in juridical status.

On this account, then, substantive property rights are vindicated by means of recourse to the innate right of each as the formal condition or presupposition of their moral possibility. Note the non-foundationalist relation between innate and acquired right. Neither is self-supporting; innate and acquired right stand in a relation of mutual dependence. The practical reality of the merely formal concept of innate right depends for its indirect empirical instantiation on substantively specifiable property claims. At the same time, the moral validity of substantive property claims depends on the acknowledgement of innate right as their underlying formal presupposition. Phenomenologically substantive property claims precede innate right; justificatorily innate right is prior to acquired right. Crucially, neither can be vindicated independently of appeal to the other. To invoke foundational rights talk in relation to innate right is to fall foul of Kant's well-known non-foundationalist strategy of philosophical justification in general.

<sup>34</sup> cf Flikschuh, *Originally Mine?*

<sup>35</sup> Textually, the situation is of course considerably more complicated; I here abstract, eg, from the concept of intelligible possession as the direct object of the justificatory 'deduction' in the main text. cf Kant, *The Metaphysics of Morals*, 6: 249.

## **IV. Human Rights as a Transcendent Concept**

I began this chapter by suggesting that if one must have a distinctively *Kantian* conception of human rights, a plausible approach would be to think of it as a transcendent concept. The argument for such a transcendent human rights conception required some ground-clearing. Over the last two sections I first set out Kant's systematic division of the field of ordinary morality in general: this to counter the widespread implicit assumption of philosophical foundationalism especially in relation to Kant's philosophy of right. I then proceeded to argue against recent interpretations of the innate right to freedom of each as a foundational premise to Kant's property rights argument; in this connection I also rejected re-description of the innate right as a human right. Over both sections my concern was to show that if one does want to develop a *plausible* Kantian human rights conception out of his moral and political thinking, one should respect relevant methodological and systematic constraints.

Consistently with those constraints as I have sketched them, a transcendent concept in the Kantian sense cannot refer to a knowable supersensible object or moral truth. A commitment to transcendence as commitment to knowable final truths would simply mirror a foundationalist commitment to self-evident first principles or rock-bottom intuitions. If we take Kant to reject foundationalism as a defensible philosophical starting point, we should not attribute to him a view according to which philosophical conclusions take the form of supersensible knowledge claims. A transcendent concept of human rights in the Kantian sense of transcendence would instead have to be thought of as an idea of practical reason the substantive content of which is constitutively indeterminable for us: we would have to think ourselves incapable of offering a determinate specification of its conceptual marks. The concept's precise content would thus have to be acknowledged as exceeding our possible understanding in either (or both) of two senses: in the sense either that we are incapable of ever experiencing the object of the clearly formed concept of X, or in the sense that we cannot even form a clear concept of X. The question arises whether concepts without possible objects or simply unclear and indistinct ideas can have any possible function for us. Kant notoriously argues that they can.36

The standard Kantian example of a transcendent concept is the idea of God.37 The marks of that concept include notions such as omniscience, omnipotence, moral perfection. We might think we have a clear and distinct idea of God. Kant denies that the clarity of our idea of God warrants an inference to God's actual existence. Though we can form the relevant concept or idea, we can have no knowledge of its

<sup>36</sup> cf Kant, *The Critique of Pure Reason*, A 642-704 / B 670-732. See also Karl Ameriks, 'The Critique of Metaphysics: The Structure and Fate of Kant's Dialectic', in Paul Guyer (ed.), *Kant and Modern Philosophy* (Cambridge University Press, 2006), 269–302. For an excellent analysis of Kant's related distinction between knowledge and faith, see Andrew Chignell, 'Belief in Kant', *Philosophical Review*, 116 (2007): 323-60.

<sup>37</sup> cf Kant, *Critique of Pure Reason*, A 631-A669 / B 659-697; also A 705-831 / B 733-860. Also Kant, *Critique of Practical Reason*, 5:124–48.

object. This acknowledgement in itself may lead us to revise our initial presumption regarding the clarity even of our concept of God. Perhaps our concept of God is in fact less clear and distinct than we initially took it to be. Can we really form a clear *idea* even of what it is to be infinitely wise or powerful? At the end of *Groundwork* Kant speaks of the idea of freedom or the moral law—in that context the two are interchangeable—as one that exceeds all possible understanding for us: we comprehend at best its incomprehensibility. This acknowledgement is a prelude to the second *Critique*'s acceptance of freedom as a non-vindicable (not self-evident!) 'fact of reason'.38 I take this to amount to acquisence in our limited knowledge in the second sense specified. We cannot even form a very clear idea of freedom: the very concept 'loses itself in the intelligible realm' (*verliert sich im Intelligiblen*).39 This does not stop Kant from also declaring the idea of freedom the keystone of the critical philosophy. At the heart of Kant's philosophy is thus (scandalously, if you're a Cartesian) an unclear and indistinct idea—an idea of which we understand that we cannot fully comprehend it.

It is the reflective dimension of Kantian transcendent ideas that warrants their practical employment even despite the strict unknowability of their contents. The transcendent idea of God as supreme moral being or of our freedom as members of an intelligible order has a regulative or reflective function in the domain especially of practical reason. Thus while in the domain of theoretical reason the idea of God enables us, according to the first *Critique*, to order empirical experience in accordance with the idea of a purposively instituted natural order; its principal employment is in the domain of practical reason where critical faith in the possibility of God's existence allows us to hope for the non-futility of our moral agency.40 The critical warrant for our employment of transcendent concepts of God, or of our freedom as part-noumenal beings, lies in our acknowledgement of these ideas' objective indeterminacy—ie, of our utter lack of knowledge of their possible objects. In that sense they function as a reflective reminder of human frailty and finitude, both epistemologically and morally.

If one were to think of the concept of human rights along these lines, one would think of it as a regulative idea of practical reason the constitutive content of which is indeterminable for us yet the reflective employment of which serves to remind us of our fallibility in the context of the morality of right. As noted, I do not think Kant himself possessed the concept of a human right—transcendent or substantive. Nor am I convinced that his political philosophy requires one. At the very least, I would say that nothing that is affirmed in the *Doctrine of Right* objectively *requires* recourse to the concept of human rights as necessary ground of positive law's practical vindication. In this, the concept of human rights is unlike that of innate right, which *is* indispensible, on my reading, to the moral justifiability of persons' substantive property claims. On the other hand, I concede that there is also nothing in the *Doctrine of Right*

<sup>38</sup> Kant, *Groundwork*, 4: 463; *Critique of Practical Reason*, 5: 42–3, 47–8, 55.

<sup>39</sup> Kant, *Metaphysics of Morals*, 6: 252.

<sup>40</sup> See, eg, Mary-Barbara Zeldin, 'Principles of Reason, Degrees of Judgment, And Kant's Arguments for the Existence of God', *The Monist*, 54 (1970): 285–301. On the difference between subjectively sufficient and objectively sufficient warrant in Kant, see also Andrew Chignell, 'Kant's Concepts of Justification', *Nous*, 41 (2007): 33–63.

that *precludes* conceiving the idea of human rights as a transcendent concept relative to the domain of positive law making. In particular, so long as the idea is not treated as supplying the foundational premise to morally legitimate law making, nothing speaks against its possible status as a subjectively necessary reflective idea that arises from the process of public law making itself.

Recall Kant's discussion of the idea of God in the doctrine of postulates of the second *Critique*. The claim there is that the possibility of morality does not depend on the idea of God but that it is, to the contrary, our acknowledgement of the moral law's validity for us, which leads us to the idea of God. The idea of God is a subjectively necessary postulate of practical reason that arises from our acknowledgement of the moral law. 'Subjective necessity' here contrasts with 'objective sufficiency': despite our acknowledged lack of objectively sufficient theoretical warrant for affirming God's *existence*, we have subjectively sufficient practical warrant for *faith* in God's existence as supreme moral being: a warrant that is grounded in our hope concerning the non-futility of our moral endeavours even in the face of a morally often recalcitrant empirical world.

If the transcendent concept of human rights were to function similarly in the domain of political morality, we would have to think of it as an objectively indeterminate (hence objectively insufficient) yet subjectively necessary, regulative idea of reason that arises from our acknowledgement of the moral imperative to enter with all others into the civil condition, which is a condition of coercively enforced public law making. The place of human rights as reflective idea would be at the end of the lawmaking process, not at its beginning. This is an unusual place to assign human rights relative to public law making. Human rights are more standardly treated as specifying antecedent conditions of morally legitimate public law making. My contrary claim here is that, on the transcendent conception, human rights arise *from* the acknowledged moral necessity of coercive public law making, so cannot be thought of as supplying the conditions *of* law's moral justifiability. Is this not to demean the centrality and importance of the concept? I do not think so: if we were to think of the concept as constituting a mature reflection on the morality of coercive public law making in general, it might even, in a sense, constitute public law's crowning achievement. Consider, in this light, the following remarkable passage in *Perpetual Peace*:

The exalted epithets often bestowed upon a ruler ('the divinely anointed', 'the administrator of the divine will on earth and its representatives') have frequently been censured as gross and dizzying flattery, but, it seems to me, without grounds. Far from making the rule of a country arrogant, they should rather humble him in his soul, if he is intelligent (as must be assumed) and considers that he has taken on an office far too demanding for any human being—namely, the most sacred office that God has on earth, that of trustee of the right of mankind (das Recht der Menschheit)—such that he must always remain concerned about having in some ways offended against this 'apple of God's eye' (8: 353).

The passage is remarkable in part for Kant's critical absorption of traditional, religiously imbued political terminology into his secular philosophy of right. Kant rejects breezy dismissal of the 'exalted epithets' from the doctrine of the divine right to rule on the grounds that their transcendent function survives their secularization. The epithets are to be retained not because belief in divine rule is to be retained, but because their function is to remind the ruler that, strictly speaking, the assumption of public office exceeds human capacities.

Kant's claim that public office is strictly beyond human capacities is not a claim to the effect that, ideally, some supra-human legislator should take up the tasks of public office. Nor, on the other hand, should the reference to the 'right of mankind' be equated with a morally confident declaration of human rights before its time. There is instead a deep connection between the thought of public office as exceeding human capacities and the strictly reciprocally structure of Kantian rights relations. Recall: by rights no person can bind another to more than he can in turn bind her. Reciprocal rights claims demand the institution of a public enforcement authority *because* no one can claim natural (or divinely authorized) moral authority over another. Yet the institution by humans of public office is morally problematic not least in view of the unavoidable institutional elevation it requires of some over others. This is not to say that there is a conceivable alternative to human rule that would better accord with the demands of right. To the contrary: it is *because* an alternative to human rule is not available that the mentioned epithets should be retained. If the ruler *were* divinely appointed, no one would need worry about the possibility of his offending 'the apple of God's eye', for he would then simply be God's mouthpiece and could do not wrong. It is *because* the ruler is a human being who *can* do wrong that the epithets should be retained.

There is thus nothing fanciful about Kant's characterization of humanly instituted public office as 'sacred'. The epithets are a reminder of human moral fallibility—including that of human rulers. The mature legislator will be cognizant of the problematic nature of his occupation of a position of public authority over others; he will be 'humbled' by the thought of having taken on an office that, strictly speaking, exceeds fallible human capacity. The idea of the 'right of mankind' as the 'apple of God's eye' arises for a ruler who reflects, from his position as public office holder, on the morally problematic nature of his legitimate coercive authority over fellow human beings. Note here that the cited passage does appear to address the exalted ruler whom Kant in effect admonishes to approach public office intelligently, ie, with the requisite degree of humility. It is not possible to demand outright or to legislate for such an attitude of humility to public office: plenty of rulers evidently lack it. Whether or not a ruler sees fit to reflect on the moral enormity of public office and authority, and whether or not he or she will feel appropriately humbled is a matter of subjective reflective judgement—there is no guarantee that any particular ruler will possess the requisite degree of reflectiveness or humility. It is not clear to me, though, that the mere fact that we cannot guarantee that all (or any) rulers (and public office holders more generally) will adopt an appropriately reflective attitude regarding the moral hazards of public office warrants discounting the need for subjective reflection on the morally hazardous nature of public office.

## **V. The Concept of Human Rights: Indeterminacy as Transcendence?**

If one did want to offer more than a mere sketch of a possible Kantian human rights conception as transcendent idea one would have to engage in much more detailed textual and interpretive work than I can do here. Certainly, Kant does not himself offer such a conception—a contemporary Kantian human rights conception as transcendent concept would have to be constructed from textual passages, such as the above, in which Kant thematizes fallibility in judgment in relation to public office together with a much more systematic analysis and interpretation of the practically reflective function of transcendent ideas in general. All this quite apart from the question of whether any notion of transcendence—any notion of human cognitive and moral limitations—would be deemed acceptable in an age as insistently upbeat about human powers and capacities as ours.

My aims here have been much more limited. Looking back, they have, I think, been two-fold. One has been an interpretive concern: to rescue Kant's innate right from careless re-description as a semi-natural foundational right from where its ensuing fate as a newly discovered additional human rights premise is all but assured. The second concern has been to take seriously the indeterminate nature of the current concept of human rights, which is being dragged into service in relation to such a wide range of moral and political conundrums that one's mind begins to spin as soon as the concept is mentioned, leading one to suspect that its function must be other than what it is generally taken to be. I don't think these two concerns—one to do with reading Kant, the other to do with the current human rights concept—are wholly unrelated.

One of the reasons why we study the texts of great dead philosophers is in order the better to understand our own philosophical predicaments. Scholarly study is rarely, if ever, antiquitarian.41 It is nearly always motivated by philosophical concerns that exceed the concerns of the text or thinker studied. For precisely this reason, engagement with these texts has to be serious, detailed, sustained. For one thing, their thoughts are not ours and we obviously want to avoid conflating the two. For another, it is often precisely through appreciating the distance between their thoughts and ours that we gain a critical perspective upon our own. One way of putting it is to say that the serious study of dead thinkers' thoughts can alert us to our own (unavoidable) philosophical parochialism: we come to see that it is possible to think differently than we are wont to do about perennially recurring philosophical problems and ideas (the problem of political power to which human rights may be one possible response is obviously a very old one).

Against the background of these remarks it can be genuinely upsetting—*philosophically,* not psychologically—to see great works in the history of philosophy ransacked for this or that titbit to be used in order to patch up a justificatory gap in some contemporary theory that bears little resemblance to the position from which the item is lifted. I do not venture to declare Kant's *Doctrine of Right* a great work in political philosophy in its own right. But it can, I believe, assume that status when studied through the lens of what unquestioningly are among the greatest philosophical works in the history of modern philosophy—the *Critique of Pure Reason* and *Groundwork*. When read through the lens of Kant's critique of metaphysics in the first *Critique* or through the complex justificatory strategy of *Groundwork* the attribution to Kant of some kind of rights foundationalism in the *Doctrine of Right* verges on the unintelligible. To be clear: my objection here is not to rights foundationalism as such—it may be a plausible or defensible position, at

<sup>41</sup> See Allen Wood's excellent, 'What Dead Philosophers Mean', in his *Unsettling Obligations* (CSLI Publications, 2002), 213–44.

least given certain premises. My objection is to underwriting one's independent commitments to rights foundationalism by appeal to a thinker who staked his philosophical reputation on denying the plausibility of philosophical foundationalism. Importantly, the injury is to both: both to the thoughts of the dead thinker and to our own thinking. To hope to find support for rights foundationalism in the *Doctrine of Right* is to understand neither that text nor one's own philosophical commitments.

Let me turn to my second point, which is, I think, related. In this chapter I sketched, in admittedly highly summary fashion, a non-foundationalist reading of innate right as constituting nothing more than a formal presupposition of the possibility of a substantive doctrine of acquired rights. In the present context, my intention was to block the move from a foundationalist reading of innate right to its re-description as a human right. The effect of this move was to displace human rights from their usually assigned position as foundational prerequisite to positive law making: at least in Kant's legal philosophy, that position is on my account occupied by the pre-suppositionally interpreted innate right. The only place left available for a Kantian conception of human rights turned out to be at the *conclusion* of the law-making process—ie, human rights as a substantively indeterminate if subjectively necessary transcendent concept. Yet in taking this route I was implicitly guided by my opening remarks on the current tendency to overburden the concept of human rights: in its current usages the concept has been made to carry so much content that many of us barely understand any longer what we are to take the concept to mean. But perhaps this is a truth, of sorts, about the concept: perhaps it is a constitutively indeterminable concept.

The problems of practical and, attendantly, of conceptual overload in relation to human rights have hardly gone unnoticed among human rights theorists. It is a widely if not generally recognized tendency of the concept that it comes to be extended across an ever growing range of moral and political desiderata. Human rights theorists have proposed various ways in which to arrive at a more rigorously delimited concept with a correspondingly tighter range in practical application.42 In one sense, I have here gone in the opposite direction. I have in effect conceded that the concept is unspecifiable: its meaning is constitutively indeterminate. The surprising feature about Kant's philosophy is that it expressly allows for indeterminate concepts or ideas—concepts which extend themselves darkly beyond the field of possible human understanding, yet which precisely for that reason can exert a critical function upon our moral and theoretical thinking.

The human rights concept as we use it today seems to me quite a good possible candidate for characterization as a Kantian transcendent concept. We associate with it notions such as human dignity, or respect for persons as such—notions of the moral supremacy of persons merely as persons. We struggle, in truth, clearly to articulate what precisely we mean by these ideas. Indeed, I would go further: it would arguably disappoint us to arrive at a final fully perspicacious specification of these notions. This is not what we want from the concept. The indeterminate concept of human rights

<sup>42</sup> For two radically different attempt to clarify the philosophical concept of human rights contrast James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (Oxford University Press, 2008) and Beitz, *Idea of Human Rights*. For a position that denies that the problem of conceptual overload or inflation is a problem in human rights theorizing, see John Tasioulas, 'The Moral Reality of Human Rights', in T. Pogge (ed.), *Freedom from Poverty as a Human Right* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 75–102.

allows us, to the contrary, to entertain ideas of human finitude and vulnerability and the idea, more generally, of the extreme fragility of human moral and especially political relations: ideas which, were we to speak of them with great confidence or precision would undermine the point we are trying to express by means of them. If we knew what human dignity really boiled down to it would, I venture to suggest, lose its moral appeal for us. So with human rights: if we really could give a full specification of its meaning and moral significance, it would cease to fulfill its moral function as a reminder, in the political context, of the fragility of humanly instituted legal relations.

So Kant may have room for a particular kind of human rights conception. It would be very different in form and function from the currently prevalent kind, according to which human rights are substantively specifiable desiderata or even enforceable requirements for any morally justifiable system of positive law making. On the view of human rights as a transcendent concept, there are no particular substantive demands we can raise or underwrite on its basis in relation to any given system of positive law making. The concept is far too indeterminate for that: if we cannot know what precisely we mean by it we would be foolish to claim to be able to derive specific substantive demands from it. Instead, the concept would function as a subjective reflective check on the moral quality of public law making in general, reminding legislators of the fallibility of their authority and judgment in relation to those over whom they exert coercive public authority. One may deem this too little in terms of practical payoff: that is a matter for debate on another occasion. My concluding thought here is merely this: if we take seriously the constraints of Kant's philosophical thinking, we should not simply rush to find a space within it for our own favoured human rights conception about the virtue of which we have in any case long made up our minds. If we desist from thus rushing in and if instead we take the time and make the effort of trying to think within those constraints, surprising philosophical avenues may open themselves up to us, enabling us to think about human rights in ways we had not anticipated. In the case at hand, the surprising and unexpected discovery that Kant may be able to accommodate the indeterminacy of the current concept of human rights. The accommodation carries corresponding constraints, of course: accepting indeterminacy also means accepting the non-substantive function of the idea. I suspect the Kantian conception here proposed will be widely rejected in view of this constraint alone. But this is not to say that it is in itself an implausible human rights conception. Nor is it to say that we can learn nothing about human rights from studying Kant though we do not, perhaps, learn quite what we had expected.43

<sup>43</sup> This essay was written whilst I was a Senior Research Fellow at the Centre of Advanced Studies, Goethe Universität Frankfurt. I would like to thank the Centre for providing an unusually stimulating yet relaxed research environment. I would also like to thank Rowan Cruft, Simon Hope, and Andrea Sangiovanni for excellent and often incisive written comments on an earlier draft.