---
title: "Human Rights, Natural Rights, and Human Dignity"
author:
  - name: "A. John Simmons"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "138–152"
citation_key: "simmons2015natural"
---

## <span id="page-152-0"></span> [Human Rights, Natural Rights,](#page-7-9)  [and Human Dignity](#page-7-9)

*A. John Simmons*

### **I. Foundations for Human Rights**

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), in its preamble, famously recognizes "the inherent dignity . . . and the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family." And it suggests in Article 1 an intimate relationship between human dignity and human rights: "All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights." The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) appears to identify a more precise relationship between these ideas, suggesting that the human rights it names "derive from the inherent dignity of the human person." Such claims, of course, suggest the possible appropriateness of a certain sort of philosophical project, a sort of project that has not been uncommon in the literature on human rights. Begin by analyzing the idea of inherent human dignity, possessed equally by all. Then show how the moral importance of human dignity can serve as a foundation—or at least as a more basic ground—for a set of universal moral rights for human beings. Finally, determine which specific human rights are implied by this foundation. The resulting list of *moral* human rights might then be compared to the Declaration's list, or to some other list containing more recent additions from other important documents. We could then affirm these lists, correct them (by subtraction, by addition, or both), or simply note (and possibly try to explain or justify) any differences between our well-grounded set of moral human rights and the positive rights affirmed in human rights law.

A related, but more historically based (and equally familiar) philosophical project might also be suggested by the Declaration's appeal to the "equal and inalienable" rights of human persons. While the power, urgency, and frequency of appeals to human rights is, of course, a relatively recent phenomenon, largely motivated by the moral horrors perpetrated during (and surrounding) the Second World War, the historical origins of human rights thought runs back at least to classical natural rights theory. So it might seem sensible to trace the idea of human rights back to its roots in natural rights theory and in its deployment in the great rights manifestos of the eighteenth century (such as the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen). We could then try to understand the idea of a human right in terms of its growth out of the *natural* rights tradition, seeing what kinds of natural rights might count as genuinely human rights, and perhaps then again affirm, correct, or justify the Declaration's (or some other document's) enumeration of human rights.

The first sort of project, whatever its initial appeal or the apparent support it enjoys in (some of the) key historical human rights documents, might nonetheless prove to be misguided in one of a variety of ways. Perhaps the idea of human dignity is not best understood as the proper *foundation* of a theory of human rights at all, or even as something (more basic but not foundational) from which human rights can be derived. While human rights and human dignity might be intimately related in some way, the relationship between them might not be one of moral conclusion to more basic or foundational moral idea. Or perhaps the problem with *either* sort of philosophical project runs deeper than that. It might be a mistake to suppose that a theory of human rights is a better or more fully justified theory when it is made to rest on such deep and naturalistic foundations as an account of human dignity or a theory of natural rights. Such a foundational approach might yield a distorted, rather than an illuminating, understanding of human rights. This essay will briefly explore in turn each of these possible avenues of criticism of familiar foundational projects in the theory of human rights.

#### **II. Waldron on Foundations**

Jeremy Waldron, in his chapter, "Is Dignity the Foundation of Human Rights?" (this volume, chapter 5), builds upon the more general exploration of the idea of human dignity pursued in his 2009 Tanner Lectures ("Dignity, Rank, and Rights").1 This new chapter focuses more specifically on the claim "that human dignity is the foundation of human rights" (117), a position familiar to us not only from the language of important human rights conventions, but as well from the rhetoric employed in discussing them and from various more philosophical theories of human rights. The conventions themselves, as Waldron rightly notes, utilize the idea of human dignity in no consistent role, referring to it sometimes as if it were the (or a) foundation of human rights claims, but other times apparently employing it in other ways, including using it as (or in) the content of particular human rights. Waldron's take on this is in part to observe, again correctly, that the mere fact that some of the listed human rights appear to protect human dignity "explicitly and more or less directly" while others do not is not inconsistent with dignity nonetheless being the foundation for all human rights (119); nor is it inconsistent with the existence of multiple foundations for these different rights (120–1). Attending to the conventions, in short, reveals no clear or consistent stance on either what it might mean for human dignity to be the foundation of human rights or whether a foundational role is the best way to understand human dignity's relation to all human rights.

Waldron instead examines these questions by utilizing distinctions between four ways in which one concept (such as human dignity) might be the foundation of another (such as human rights). The foundational relationship could be understood in terms of (i) one concept arising from another as a matter of "history and geneology", (ii) one serving as the source of the validity or legitimacy of the other, (iii) one being logically

<sup>1</sup> Unless otherwise stated, subsequent in-text references refer to Waldron, this volume, chapter 5. The Tanner lectures are published in Jeremy Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, ed. M. Dan-Cohen (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 13–76.

derivable from the other (perhaps with the addition of certain empirical premises), or (iv) one concept throwing "some indispensable light" on the other (125).

While "historical genesis" arguments are not the kind of argument that most philosophers would take to reveal the normative "foundations" of concepts—rather than, say, merely their historical source or origin—I think Waldron is still right to mention such arguments. After all, few of those who discuss and work to promote human rights are philosophers, and the order of things in the history of ideas may well be exactly what many have in mind in talking about human dignity being the foundation of human rights. Even understood as a mere claim in the history of ideas, however, the claim that dignity is foundational for human rights is not very plausible (126). Waldron's second conception of "foundationality" is more obscure, but it involves comparing the importance of human dignity (as the source of the legitimacy of human rights claims) to a Kelsenian *grundnorm* (as the source of validity of all other norms in the legal system). I can add nothing to Waldron's skeptical treatment of this approach.

In any event, it is only the third and fourth notions of a foundation that remain actively in play in Waldron's discussion of the matter, with the third being what philosophers and legal/political theorists no doubt mostly have in mind when they speak of foundations, but the fourth seeming to Waldron to more accurately characterize the relationship between human dignity and human rights. The kind of logical derivation that Waldron imagines being provided on the third approach is one that is "partly deductive and partly empirical" (129), with the "deductive" portion involving an analytical "unpacking" of the foundational value—in this case, the value of human dignity. That unpacking would yield various value propositions, which would then serve as major premises in syllogistic arguments to conclusions about human rights. The intermediate minor premises would be empirical claims (presumably about the kinds of guarantees that would be necessary for human dignity to be realized in the world). Waldron takes James Griffin's theory of human rights to be an example of this third approach to showing that human dignity is the foundation for human rights, with Griffin's ideas about the importance of "normative agency" (and about what normative agency involves) constituting the relevant analytical unpacking of the concept of human dignity.

While I have my doubts about how well Griffin's account actually exemplifies the (third) approach Waldron describes, such doubts may have no real impact on Waldron's project in this chapter, since Waldron says that he intends neither "to endorse [Griffin's account] [n]or to criticize it" (130). Indeed, Waldron appears never to argue that there is any general reason to reject foundational derivations of his third sort, Griffin's or any other. He maintains only that we "need not" understand the point of (human) rights in such "a rigidly teleological sense" (131). Waldron then proceeds to propose a different, fourth, "foundational" model. As far as I can see, though, the truth of Waldron's preferred fourth ("indispensable light") approach—in which human dignity is viewed as a special kind of normative status—is not inconsistent with the validity and soundness of any of a wide range of possible "logical derivations" of human rights (of Waldron's *third* sort). For there to be any inconsistency between the third and fourth approaches, I think, we would have to understand the particular status of human dignity (or understand all statuses) in a special, and I think implausible, way. So even if we think "logical derivations" of the third sort need not conform very closely to Waldron's model of them—perhaps by proceeding without the sharp, syllogistic separation of value and empirical premises that Waldron imagines, or by regarding human rights as more inclusively (and less teleologically) connected to the foundational value—none of that may matter much if Waldron's approach is simply consistent with those foundational "logical derivations".

There is, however, one difference between Waldron's preferred account (of the relation of human dignity to human rights) and foundational accounts of his third sort that *might* make them genuinely inconsistent with one another. It is mentioned by Waldron almost in passing. Derivations of the third sort, Waldron suggests, "would license the derivation of other rights from a statement of the *telos*"—that is, from the relevant understanding of the goal or "the point of the rights we have" (131). So, for instance, Griffin's understanding of the point of human rights (in terms of their relation to normative agency) would, in Waldron's view, "license" the derivation of other human rights, in addition to those on the list of rights with which we begin. Waldron's preferred (fourth) strategy, however, would understand the point of human rights in a way that is "loosely oriented to a class of human rights that is in some sense given" and that does not permit "any expansion of the list of rights beyond what we started with" (131).

Waldron's use of "loosely" and "in some sense" makes it difficult to be certain how seriously we are to take these ideas, but the general line of thought nonetheless seems reasonably clear. Human rights "have a legal presence (in constitutional law or in human rights law)", and there are (or we can make) lists of those rights that are implicated in that legal presence. The lists constitute (provisionally?) fixed points in a proper approach to understanding human rights. While this fact does not "obviate the need for an understanding" of the point of those rights (131)—that is, it does not eliminate the need to see which ideas are necessary to make sense of those particular rights being grouped together on those lists—it does argue against understanding their point in a way that would justify our simply adding or subtracting rights from that set of fixed points wherever the perceived point of human rights might seem to indicate the need for this. This kind of criticism of the third model of foundational arguments is not unfamiliar. Charles Beitz, for instance, complains about the fact that "naturalistic views" (like Cranston's or Griffin's) "can yield skeptical conclusions about the scope and content of international doctrine".2 There is a *practice* of human rights to attend to in our theorizing about human rights.

It is easy to see how the spirit of Waldron's account is partly driven by the fact that the practice of human rights presents those rights "to us in the form of a list rather than as a unified theory" (120). If Waldron is right "that dignity is a status-concept, not a value-concept", then we should think of dignity, like other statuses, as "a particular package" of rights and responsibilities" that a person has in virtue of his position or situation (134)—in this case, in virtue of his being human. Human dignity is both a shorthand term for the list of human rights we find in human rights practice and includes the "*underlying idea* that informs the status in question" (135). Human

<sup>2</sup> Charles R. Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 50.

dignity includes the "common rationale" that explains how the human rights on the list "hang together" or cohere, that explains why they belong together on one list (135). So it is "a mistake—a sort of category mistake—to talk of dignity as the foundation of rights. Instead, we may say that dignity is a status that *comprises* a given set of rights" (134).3 Waldron actually puts his point somewhat differently in his Tanner Lectures: "a status account will present dignity (however defined) as foundation-*ish* (or, as we might say, foundation-*al*) but it may not be a foundation in the simple way that (for example) the major value-premises of a consequential argument are a foundation of everything else in the consequentialist's moral theory".4 Given that Waldron allows in closing that some "version of the claim that human dignity is the foundation of human rights" is "true and helpful" (137), perhaps this latter way of putting his point is truer to his intentions than the former.

Lists of things (including, perhaps, things like human rights) do, of course, typically suggest their own unifying rationales, their implicit reasons for collecting together distinct items under one heading. My grocery lists, to-do lists, and wish lists all unify diversity according to certain (usually transparent) ends or purposes. And within those lists, there may be further divisions of items, again unified by some sub-purpose—as when my grocery list includes some items for hygiene, some for cooking, and some for eating-without-cooking. Lists of human rights usually appear similarly to include various sub-groups with their own rationales, all unified under one common purpose. So some human rights seem chiefly to be aimed at promoting or protecting individual welfare, with others providing for personal security, due process, individual liberty, political equality, group welfare, and so on. Each category of right may have its own distinctive sub-rationale, or multiple groups may share the same one—such as protection from living in fear, in pain, or in desperate need, protection of one's ability to pursue relationships and projects that make life worthwhile, or protection from being treated as a mere pawn in the power games of others. All might be aspects of what is necessary to live a "fully human" life, the life of a "human person" (as opposed to the life of a mere human animal), or a "life of dignity". Protecting and facilitating human dignity might thus serve as the overall rationale for some list of human rights, unifying the (themselves unified) sub-groups of human rights. Perhaps something like this is what Dworkin has in mind in characterizing dignity as a "portmanteau description",5 a portmanteau being a bag that, as it were, unifies separate (but themselves unified) compartments.

3 As opposed, eg, to Feinberg's view of dignity as the *capacity to claim* such rights: "respect for persons. . .may simply be respect for their rights; and what is called 'human dignity' may simply be the recognizable capacity to assert claims." (from "The Nature and Value of Rights", in Joel Feinberg, *Rights, Justice, and the Bounds of Liberty* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), 151).

5 Dworkin, however, appears to be concerned with "unifying" rather different items than I am discussing here: "I use dignity as an organizing idea . . .to collect widely shared ethical principles under one portmanteau description". For Dworkin "dignity requires self-respect and authenticity." "Someone lives well when he senses and pursues a good life for himself and does so with dignity: with respect for the importance of other people's lives and for their ethical responsibility as well as his own" (Ronald Dworkin, *Justice for Hedgehogs* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 205, 204, 419).

<sup>4</sup> Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, 21.

So suppose for a moment that human dignity is in fact best understood as a special status (enjoyed by all humans) that comprises a particular list of human rights along with that list's guiding rationale. Two further questions seem appropriate. First, exactly what kind of status for humans is being asserted in putting forward this list of human rights (along with human dignity as that list's guiding rationale)? Second, is there any good reason to think of that list of rights as fixed or "given"?

Waldron answers the first question in his Tanner Lectures. The idea of human dignity, he suggests, is the idea of humans enjoying the highest possible status, "comparable to a rank of nobility—only a rank assigned now to every human person, equally without discrimination: dignity as nobility for the common man."6 "We are all chiefs; there are no Indians. . .High status can be universalized and still remain high".7 Here Waldron brings together his ideas on the importance of human rights, the idea of human dignity as a status-concept, and the fact that the word "'dignity' has resonances of something like noble bearing."8

In these claims it seems to me that Waldron over-reaches a bit. Our ordinary notion of dignity does indeed convey something like a sense of "noble bearing"; but the "nobility" at issue here is surely less the bearing of one who enjoys aristocratic privileges, and more the bearing of someone who is simply upstanding, independent, imposing. A dignified demeanor is one that is self-assured, uncorrupted, and healthy, bowing and scraping to none, strong in adversity—like the "noble savage" ("le bon sauvage") of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century romantic drama and literature. When we think of the popular origins of human rights discourse—for instance, in the process by which the French Declaration flowed from the French and American Revolutions—it seems clear that "leveling down" was being taken as seriously as "leveling up". The exalted statuses of nobility and kings (as "little gods") were as much the target for attack as were the degraded statuses of serf and peon and peasant. The sturdy yeoman seems a better model for the dignified bearer of human rights than does the blood nobility.9 To take a more recent example: Huey Long's populist campaign slogan may have been "every man a king", but this was carefully followed by the qualifier "but no one wears a crown". Perhaps human dignity does capture the idea of a standing for humans that is above that of all other creatures, but it seems to convey that superiority with more modesty and restraint than is typical of king or earl.

Even granting Waldron his associations between dignity and noble rank, however, is there good reason to suppose that the list of human rights in which that rank (partly) consists is more or less fixed, resisting "expansion"? It is hard to see why we should be persuaded of this, at least if we follow Waldron in viewing the status of human-right-holder as including that position's guiding rationale, as including the

<sup>6</sup> Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, 22. 7 Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, 60.

<sup>8</sup> Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, 21.

<sup>9</sup> This appears to be one of the common themes in the critical responses that were recently published along with Waldron's lectures, especially in those by Michael Rosen and Don Herzog. Waldron's reply is to concede that while we may not want human dignity to "be associated with the old arrogance of nobility, . . .we will expect it to be associated with a furious sense of one's rights and a willingness to stand up for them as part of what it means to stand up for what is best and most important in oneself" (*Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, 145).

ideas that give the list of human rights their unity and point. Acknowledging that a list of rights is not a mere plurality—acknowledging that there is a clear point to gathering those rights together while excluding others—may not logically commit one to any position on the subject of whether that justifying point can require (or permit) the inclusion on that list of additional, originally neglected items. But such an acknowledgement surely at least *suggests* that view. Other kinds of lists, along with their unifying rationales, surely call for or permit such expansion (as when I simply remember or discover another thing that needs to be purchased or done, and so needs to be added to my lists). Only, I think, if we suppose that the status of human dignity is not a general *normative* status at all, but only a legal status, would we be inclined to suppose that the list justifiably resists expansion—and only even then if we think of legal status in an especially narrow and implausible way. Other kinds of legal status grow and evolve as social facts change or become clear, or as prejudices narrow or dissolve. Even a determinedly practice-based approach to human rights can "achieve some critical leverage on the practice as we observe it".10

If a proper understanding of the status of human dignity might itself "license derivations" of additional human rights for our list, however, then there is no obvious inconsistency involved in both accepting Waldron's very plausible analysis of human dignity and at the same time pursuing foundational projects of Waldron's third sort ("logical derivations", such as Griffin's). The concept of human dignity might both serve as Waldron's fourth sort of foundation, by casting "indispensable light" on the concept of human rights, and at the same time serve as the (third kind of) foundation from which flow arguments that have as their conclusions either our original list of human rights or that list with additions to or subtractions from it. Perhaps Waldron never really intends to deny this possibility, as he appears to do when trying to contrast the third and fourth approaches to human dignity as the foundation of human rights. He is certainly prepared to allow that human dignity might itself rest on deeper foundational ideas or that it and other ideas might be co-foundational (137). But perhaps he is also willing to accept the possibility of consistent, dual roles for the concept of human dignity in two different types of "foundational" approaches.

My own view is that a full defense of the importance of human rights does, indeed, require deep foundations, not just something "foundation-ish". And, as we saw at the start, we might look for such deep foundations not only in possible conceptual connections between human dignity and human rights, but also in the historical connections between human rights theory and natural rights theory. Where Waldron rightly dismisses the idea that thought about human dignity served as the historical "foundation" of human rights thought, it is clearly much easier to defend the idea of a strong historical connection between human rights thought and earlier *natural rights* thought. As we've seen, of course, mere historical genesis (historical origin or source) is not what we theorists normally have in mind when we speak of "foundations". But the connection between human rights thought and natural rights theory might be far stronger than one of mere historical genesis. Human rights might be not just historically tied to natural rights; they might *be* natural rights, or, rather, they

10 Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 106.

might be one distinctive and important class of natural rights. The "deep foundations" of human rights theory would then be simply identical to the foundations of natural rights theory.

#### **III. Naturalistic Theories of Human Rights**

What would claiming that "human rights are natural rights" amount to? Suppose we define natural rights as those moral rights (a) that could be possessed by persons in a state of nature and (b) whose grounds (or justifications) are not merely conventional.11 Human rights, if we understand them (in the standard fashion) as *universal* rights that is, as rights necessarily possessed by all (and only) human beings—would then be those natural (non-conventional) moral rights that not only could be but must be possessed by humans, not only in a state of nature but in all other "non-natural" conditions as well. Human rights must be "innate" rights (ie, rights enjoyed from the moment that human life begins) and rights that cannot be lost—by alienation or renunciation (ie, through voluntary choice), by forfeiture (through negligence or wrongdoing), or by prescription (either through governmental "acts of prescription" or through long passages of time without enforcement).

There is, I believe, a strong case that can be made for the view that, strictly speaking, there are no human rights, so understood, either because biological humans who lack even minimal cognitive and affective potential do not hold such rights (so that perhaps only "human persons", but not all "human beings" or "members of the human family," possess human rights),12 or because no such rights are *in principle* inalienable or nonforfeitable (even if they may not *routinely* be either alienable or forfeitable). But it might well also be true that certain natural rights are *nearly* universal—that is, innately possessed by nearly all biological humans and alienable or forfeitable only in extraordinary cases. And if that is true, then *declarations* of human rights and human rights conventions probably ought to describe and enforce the most basic moral rights of persons *as if* they were truly universal human rights, if only to guard against the amply demonstrated human propensity for conceiving of and treating those who are different as *sub-human* (and so as morally vulnerable to segregation, confinement, exploitation, or extermination).13

Further, if there *are* natural moral rights that are both innate and cannot be lost (or that are *nearly* so), the likely candidates for inclusion in this category will make a familiar and a naturally unified list. People do terrible things to others, and in doing so they forfeit rights that they formerly possessed. May they forfeit *all* rights by such acts (as Locke seemed to believe, suggesting that committing great enough wrongs reduces one to the moral status of a dangerous lower animal)? Perhaps (as Locke might

<sup>11</sup> I defend this understanding of natural rights in A. John Simmons, *The Lockean Theory of Rights* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), 89–91.

<sup>12</sup> The important human rights documents appear to use these terms more or less interchangeably.

<sup>13</sup> This may be true even with respect to particularly clear cases of biological humans who lack all cognitive capacities. Declaring the universality of legal human rights effectively draws the line (between right-holders and non-right-holders) in a place sufficiently clear to discourage most agenda-driven rationalizations for cruel and inhumane treatment of fellow humans.

have been persuaded to concede and as the US Bill of Rights suggests) a doer of terrible wrongs forfeits his right not to be killed, but not his right not to be tortured, his right not to be killed in degrading or humiliating ways, his right not to be hunted for sport or punished for the entertainment of others, and so on. Similarly, people are often thoughtless or imprudent in alienating their rights (for instance, in losing needed funds or their return tickets while visiting a casino). May people thus alienate (or risk alienating) *all* of their *moral* rights? If we think not, surely the best candidates for inalienability would again appear to be moral rights whose legal analogues in US law have that same property—such as the inalienable legal right not to be held as a slave (or perhaps the right not to be killed or the right to the satisfaction of our most basic needs).

In short, the natural rights that seem likeliest to qualify as universal human rights (because they are neither forfeitable nor alienable) are precisely those rights possession of which we might naturally say is necessary for living (or dying) with appropriate human dignity. The best arguments for human rights foundations in natural rights theory, then, seem bound to return us to that same idea of human dignity that is explored (and analyzed as a status-concept) by Waldron. Whether we begin from the "top", with a list of legally established human rights (accompanied by their unifying rationale), or begin from the "bottom", by thinking about those innate natural rights that seem least likely to be alienable or forfeitable, our arguments appear to converge on the same conclusions. So if, as I've argued, there is no genuine inconsistency between Waldron's preferred approach and an approach starting from the foundations of natural rights theory, the two approaches may be not only logically consistent but mutually supportive.

None of this, of course, constitutes an argument that human rights are best understood as a special category of natural rights. The arguments at the foundations of natural rights theory (however we might best develop them) may be thought to simply fail. Or a general moral skepticism, a more targeted skepticism about non-conventional bases for morality, or a still more targeted skepticism about the possibility of natural moral *rights* might be thought to derail natural rights theory from the start. While I believe that these forms of skepticism about natural rights are in the end indefensible—and that plausible arguments for natural rights foundations are in fact available to us—the past few decades of political philosophy/theory have been more centrally devoted to avoiding than to resolving such debates. And that same strategy of avoidance has, of course, been deployed in discussions of *human* rights, due largely to the influence of Rawls' account of human rights in *The Law of Peoples*.

Rawls does not include in his discussion of human rights any real critique of "foundational" projects that approach human rights through an analysis of human dignity or through a theory of natural rights; but a kind of critique is, of course, implicit in his re-deployment in *The Law of Peoples* of the basic argumentative structure of *Political Liberalism*, with its rejection of appeals to "comprehensive" moral views as foundations for a theory of justice. The critique does not, however, in either case take the form of real skepticism about foundational projects in value theory. Rawls famously denies that the arguments of *Political Liberalism* (and, by implication, the subsequent arguments of *The Law of Peoples*) rest on such skepticism.14 Rather, the conception

<sup>14</sup> John Rawls, *Political Liberalism* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), 62–3.

of justice defended in *Political Liberalism* is understood by Rawls as a *political* conception, just as the theory of human rights in *The Law of Peoples* is intended to be a *political* conception of human rights. Human rights are simply the "urgent" rights that must be respected in a society for it to count as a "system of social cooperation", and so for that society to be a candidate for inclusion in (and non-intervention within) a stable, international Society of Peoples.15 Similarly, justice as fairness (in *Political Liberalism*) is that conception of justice on which might be achieved a stable overlapping consensus (in a liberal society) among proponents of competing comprehensive conceptions of the good.

The philosophical quest for deep foundations (for a theory of human rights or a theory of justice) may be an interesting one, but completing it is, in Rawls' view, unnecessary for doing the philosopher's work in political and legal philosophy. The human rights acknowledged in Rawls' Law of Peoples "do not depend on any particular comprehensive religious doctrine or philosophical doctrine of human nature;" but "still, the Law of Peoples does not deny these doctrines".16 The Rawlsian "political" approach to these basic problems in political and legal philosophy, if it is to remain *genuinely non-committal* on questions about deep philosophical foundations, thus appears to leave open the following disturbing possibility: that a demonstrably true or valid "comprehensive doctrine" might have implications for an account of social justice or human rights that directly conflict with the "reasonable" content of the "political" conceptions of justice or human rights. Only a Rawlsian conviction that reasonableness trumps truth in political philosophy—so that true comprehensive views must be reasonable, acknowledging the political conceptions as "modules" attaching to and modifying those views—seems to stand in the way of our being forced to choose between a true theory of human rights and a thinner, but reasonable, political conception of human rights. Those of us who are reluctant to follow Rawls in that conviction are not likely, I think, to be persuaded to simply embrace his political conception of human rights, at best allowing that there are two kinds of (or two ways of thinking about) human rights.

More recently, however, Charles Beitz has argued for a related, "practical" conception of human rights (that he regards as "implicit" in Rawls' view) in a way that might appear to close off such an option. Rather than simply pursuing a strategy of avoidance, Beitz has advanced a more systematic case against all theories of human rights that are "naturalistic" in form—including, particularly, those theories (of the sorts under consideration here) that begin with the idea of human dignity or with a theory of natural rights. The contemporary practice of human rights, he argues, has made appeals to such foundations (for human rights claims) not only obsolete, but seriously misleading. I will here briefly focus our attention just on Beitz's arguments against the idea (suggested earlier) that human rights are natural rights.

Chapter 3 of Beitz's *The Idea of Human Rights*, an extended critique of naturalistic conceptions of human rights,17 cites as an example of such conceptions my own

- 17 The accounts of human rights defended by Maurice Cranston, James Griffin, and Amartya Sen and Martha Nussbaum come in for the bulk of Beitz's attack.
<sup>15</sup> John Rawls, *The Law of Peoples* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 199), 68, 79–80.

<sup>16</sup> Rawls, *The Law of Peoples*, 68.

characterization of human rights as "those natural rights that are innate and that cannot be lost".18 Beitz then summarizes his more general understanding of such views as follows:

Naturalistic conceptions regard human rights as having a character and basis that can be fully comprehended without reference to their embodiment and role in any public doctrine or practice. According to such a view, the "human rights" of international doctrine derive their identity and authority from this more basic level of value.19

Beitz's most general complaint about such naturalistic views (aside from the difficulties involved in characterizing them precisely) is that "our understanding of international human rights is distorted rather than helped by conceiving them on the model of natural rights".20 Human rights are "unlike natural rights in not presupposing any one view about their basis or justification".21 And, again unlike natural rights, for some human rights we cannot "conceptualize them as existing in a condition where there are no institutions" (since they presuppose certain institutional structures),22 nor can we think of them as "timeless" (since they are clearly framed with modern and modernizing societies in mind).23 Finally, where modern natural rights theories "were primarily attempts to formulate constraints on the use of a government's coercive power in circumstances of religious and moral diversity . . . , the motivating concern of international human rights is evidently broader" (being "an effort to identify the social conditions necessary for the living of dignified human lives").24

While Beitz does not think these arguments "add up to a refutation of naturalistic theories",25 he regards them as "sufficiently discouraging"26 to justify moving on to other possible approaches. The view he ultimately defends, as his favored alternative, is a "practical" approach that "tries to grasp the concept of a human right by understanding the role this concept plays within" the global ("discursive and political") practice of human rights.27 Beitz attempts to reply to the obvious objections to such practice-based analyses—namely, that they reduce human rights claims to nothing more than "complicated sociological facts" and give "too much authority to the status quo"—by distinguishing, first, between "conceptualizing" human rights and explaining their reason-giving force, and, second, by distinguishing between "the details of present practice" and the roles of human rights claims within the best understanding of such a practice.28 Beitz's disagreement with Rawls' approach seems to lie primarily in a difference concerning the best way to understand the roles of human rights in global practice.

- 
28 Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 104–6. These distinctions do not, I should note, actually suffice to answer these most fundamental concerns about any practice-based account of human rights. But I will not further pursue that problem here.

<sup>18</sup> A. John Simmons, "Human Rights and World Citizenship: The Universality of Human Rights in Kant and Locke", in *Justification and Legitimacy* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 185.

<sup>19</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 49–50. 20 Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 50–1.

<sup>21</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 54. 22 Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 55.

<sup>23</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 57–8. 24 Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 57.

<sup>25</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 71. 26 Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 96.

<sup>27</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 8.

I believe that Beitz here underestimates the difficulties involved in giving a clear and uncontroversial account of the purposes and trajectories of human rights claims in domestic and international politics,29 as do others who defend "practical" or "political" approaches to human rights.30 But I will confine my attention here to a different problem for Beitz's position: namely, its dramatic underestimation of the resources available to a plausible "naturalistic" theory of human rights—in this case, the kind of natural rights theory of human rights that we've been considering. Beitz's criticisms of such a theory, remember, concern (1) two ways in which it distorts our understanding of the point of human rights claims in actual practice (by presupposing a single justification for them and by misunderstanding their "motivating concerns") and (2) two conceptual bars to natural rights serving as the basis for the human rights of actual practice (since many human rights cannot be understood as either "pre-institutional" or "timeless").

Both criticisms of natural rights accounts in (1) seem to me inapt. Whether or not human rights practice presupposes one (or any) justificatory foundation for all human rights claims is at best unclear. Some of the important human rights conventions, as we've seen, do in fact suggest derivations of human rights from more foundational ideas (or co-derivation of human rights along with related ideas). What the conventions seem pretty clearly to be intent on avoiding is any reference to possible *religious* foundations for human rights claims, for obvious reasons. But it is not at all plain from their language that the central human rights documents (or the actual practice of human rights law) are intent on ruling out all secular and (for that reason) more universally accessible possible foundations for human rights claims—such as "deep" ideas of human dignity or natural rights.

Further, Beitz's point about the "breadth" of the "motivating concerns of international human rights"—compared to the narrower concerns of historical natural rights theories—seems, by itself at least, a non sequitur. The fact that particular kinds of social concerns were in the minds of their authors is far from conclusive in identifying the true characters of either philosophical theories or legal conventions. Natural rights theory, while emerging historically amid concerns to constrain tyrannical princes and centrally concerned with identifying the moral limits on their coercive powers, can (and does) still have direct relevance for other kinds of social concerns—such as the necessary conditions for living a "dignified human life". Author preoccupations do not define theoretical reach. Locke's theory of natural rights, for instance, was developed in the shadow of deep fears about the coercive imposition of Catholic rule (through the king's subservience to the Pope or through dealings with the Catholic king of France); but later uses of very closely related views (such as those appealed to

<sup>29</sup> See, for instance, Allen Buchanan's discussion of "political theories" of human rights ("Human Rights", in D. Estlund (ed.), *The Oxford Handbook of Political Philosophy* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 284–7.

<sup>30</sup> See, eg, Joseph Raz's defense of a political approach, in which he advances (largely without argument) the view that the practice-based role of human rights claims is to "set limits to the sovereignty of states" ("Human Rights Without Foundations", in S. Besson and J. Tasioulas (eds.), *The Philosophy of International Law* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 328.

by Jefferson and some of the other American Founders) drew on the theory's resources to justify protests against perfectly secular political tyranny.

Consider next Beitz's claims that the timeless and pre-institutional character of natural rights makes them an impossible conceptual "fit" with many acknowledged human rights (and, as such, an impossible foundation or basis for all human rights). We might, with Allen Buchanan, try to blunt the force of this criticism by arguing that, despite natural rights being pre-institutional in nature, "an attempt to realize them in a system of international legal rights will need to take existing institutions into account".31 I think, however, that a more direct response to Beitz (on behalf of a natural rights theory of human rights) is possible here. Even if we understand natural rights as I've suggested—as "timeless" rights that can be possessed in a pre-institutional condition—there are still at least two ways in which such natural rights might nonetheless be directly concerned with institutional forms (despite their being "pre-institutional") and be directly concerned with distinctive features of (and threats to) modern or modernizing societies (despite their being "timeless").

The "two ways" that I have in mind correspond to the two traditions of natural rights thought. The Kantian tradition is committed to only one innate natural right: the right to the maximal freedom (from constraint by the choices of others) consistent with a like freedom for all. But this one innate right includes, on the Kantian view, the right to be in civil society with others, governed by those institutions necessary to realizing all of the social conditions for full freedom.32 It is, in short, a natural right (held against all others) to be collectively subject to an institutional structure that effectively administers justice (by determining and enforcing our rights). Contemporary Kantians fill out this basic argument with a suitably contemporary and democratic conception of what is required for social justice to be effectively administered. Suppose, for instance, that we determine that some theory of justice (perhaps Rawls' theory) is defensible. Then the Kantian argument justifies a natural right to as much specific institutional content as is implied by that theory. And this natural right can still plausibly be characterized as both timeless and necessarily possessed by all. Further, since it is a right to *effective* justice-administering institutions, it is a right to suitably different institutions in different historical settings—including rights to appropriately modern institutions (which will counter modern threats) in modern societies. And if, as I believe, the best account of what makes an institutional structure just will yield not merely domestic requirements, but also requirements regarding how societal institutions are oriented toward those outside societal borders, such arguments will have straightforward implications for the international institutions that are sometimes directly referred to in modern human rights practice.

Consider now the second "way", that of the Lockean natural rights tradition. Lockean accounts of natural rights focus primarily on broad rights to self-government and more limited rights to positive assistance from others. Lockeans, unlike Kantians, thus do

<sup>31</sup> Buchanan, "Human Rights", 286. Here, Buchanan suggests that Beitz's criticism would only be effective against views that "*identify* legal human rights with moral rights understood as preinstitutional rights". I'm not certain that I understand how such an identification is even conceptually possible.

<sup>32</sup> See my discussion of Kant's position in Simmons, "Human Rights and World Citizenship", especially 188–9.

not acknowledge natural rights to the cooperative provision of justice-administering institutions. We may join with others to create such institutions, where all agree to do so; but none is naturally entitled to others' participation in such an endeavor. The Lockean tradition does, however, defend a natural right not to be non-consensually subjected to (even just) political/legal institutions, as well as a natural right to reparation for such wrongs. And implied by such rights (to be free of involuntary subjection and to have such wrongs repaired) is the natural right that others at least try to *minimize* the wrongs they do to us.

In the modern world, most of us have been subjected without our consent to political, legal, and economic institutions that deeply affect our life prospects (and prospects for self-government), institutions that are extremely wide-reaching and straightforwardly coercive. Being subjected at birth to the basic structures of our societies is not a way of our choosing anything. It thus, in my view, constitutes a violation of our natural rights, a wrong that, if it will not be fully repaired (as seems extremely likely), must at least be minimized. And the obvious path to minimizing that wrong (in a society that inevitably will not fully correct that wrong) is to subject people only to institutions that treat them as fairly as is possible (in the context of a coercively imposed and maintained system). So Lockean natural rights theory can in fact defend the very same kind of natural right to a fully just institutional structure that flows more directly, as we've seen, from Kantian natural rights theory—though that natural right is now conceived of as a remedial right for the many non-consenting residents of modern societies. And the right in question can thus have precisely the same institutional and historically sensitive contents as the Kantian version of that right. While this right is admittedly, on the Lockean version of it, not strictly "timeless" or necessarily possessed by all humans, the historical pervasiveness and duration of the practice of non-consensually subjecting persons to political authority makes it virtually so. Here, I think, the Lockean theory actually follows a line of argument suggested, but never completed, in Rawls' early efforts to explain the force of his own theory of justice.33

Such arguments for natural rights to institutional provision (or institutional restraint) may at first seem not to yield rights to sufficiently specific institutions to match (or to justify) the institutional content of human rights claims in actual practice. Indeed, Beitz's objection to such natural right arguments appears to be precisely that they must surrender either their claim to genuine "naturalness" or their claim to justify rights to "an extended catalog" of institutional arrangements.34 But, to be fair, the institutional content of the global practice of human rights is not, for the most part, itself very specific; and some cases of well-known human rights claims that *are* very specific about institutional requirements are precisely the cases that arouse the most skepticism *within* that practice. In any event, Beitz's own examples of human

<sup>33</sup> "No society can, of course, be a scheme of cooperation which men enter voluntarily in a literal sense; each person finds himself placed at birth in some particular position in some particular society, and the nature of this position materially affects his life prospects. Yet a [just society] comes as close as a society can to being a voluntary scheme . . . " (John Rawls, *A Theory of Justice* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971), 13).

<sup>34</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 56.

rights with institutional content—human rights to political asylum, to political participation, and to free elementary education35—can be easily derived from *either* of the kinds of natural rights arguments sketched earlier (by straightforward appeal to the justice-based requirements for institutions that secure international and domestic freedom and equal opportunity).

Natural rights accounts of human rights, then, are far more flexible (and hence far more promising) than Beitz's critique of them suggests. Perhaps natural rights theory cannot yield an account of human rights according to which they are strictly universal (ie, held by all or only biological human beings). But many other kinds of theories of human rights reach that same conclusion. If I am correct, though, a natural rights account can capture the modern and institutional characters displayed by some human rights claims, while still conceiving of the rights at issue as suitably timeless and pre-institutional. And, as we've seen, a natural rights account can capture the orientation of modern human rights practice toward identifying "the social conditions necessary for the living of dignified human lives". Indeed, one of the theory's great virtues is its ability to give appropriately "deep" content to the idea of human dignity that guides and unifies the lists of human rights that practice has produced. We do far better in understanding human rights, I think, to continue to pursue and criticize the arguments of natural rights theories than we do in trying to justify remaining neutral in such debates or in constructing blanket (and necessarily distorting) rejections of all "naturalistic" theories of human rights. In the end, I suppose, we might all come to agree that the foundational arguments of natural rights theory are in some way fatally flawed, or that they cannot constitute the basis of a satisfactory theory of human rights. But this has not yet been convincingly shown. The game, I think, is still afoot.

<sup>35</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights*, 55.