---
title: "Personal Deserts and Human Rights"
author:
  - name: "James W. Nickel"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "153–165"
citation_key: "nickel2015deserts"
---

## <span id="page-167-0"></span> [Personal Deserts and Human Rights](#page-7-10)

*James W. Nickel*

Personal moral desert can make it permissible, appropriate, and even obligatory for benefits, burdens, and penalties to be given to or imposed on people on the basis of the moral quality of their individual behavior and/or character. Could (or do) personal moral deserts play a role in the justification and shaping of human rights? And if so, what form could (or does) that role take? Human rights theorists (including me) have generally assumed that in order to give an adequate account of the values and norms underlying human rights it is not necessary to mention desert. This chapter challenges that assumption.

It is easy to construct nightmare scenarios purporting to show that taking deserts seriously in the realm of human rights would be destructive. In these scenarios some people have their rights suspended or permanently forfeited for bad behavior, the undeserving have their rights trimmed and the virtuous have their rights enlarged, and the universality and egalitarian character of human rights are greatly diminished.1

It would be good to know if personal deserts are or should be operative in the realm of human rights, and if so, whether anything like these scenarios would follow. And if these consequences do not follow, it would be good to have some idea of what keeps this from happening. Is it that desert is not a very powerful norm? Is it that other values and norms fully or partially block considerations of desert from playing a strong role? Or is it that desert is too hard to administer fairly and consistently? This chapter is a start, but only a start, at answering these questions.

James Griffin included a brief discussion of deserts and human rights in his recent book, *On Human Rights*.2 As a theorist who proposes to base all moral human rights on autonomy or "normative agency," Griffin denies that considerations of desert contribute to the justification or shaping of human rights. He allows, however, that desert may play a role from the outside when rights are being applied. Discussing the case of a person needing an organ transplant whose need stems from his own bad behavior, Griffin allows that "fault must have weight at least as a tie-breaker." He continues: "If I am clearly undeserving and you thoroughly deserving, but we are regarded by the hospital as having equal claim on the next [organ] available for transplant, you may protest that the way the hospital decides priorities is unfair."

If considerations of desert were operative in the realm of human rights, and if the result was to make the undeserving less eligible to have or use particular rights,

<sup>1</sup> On the universal and egalitarian character of human rights see James W. Nickel, *Making Sense of Human Rights*, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2007), 7–14, 35–82.

<sup>2</sup> James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 184–5.

this would be incompatible in Griffin's view with the universality of human rights. He says that "a restriction to the deserving cannot be written into the human right itself. . . " because such a restriction "is incompatible with the "universality of the class of right-bearers." I criticize this claim in this chapter. I argue as well that the role of considerations of desert in the realm of human rights is sometimes positive (contributing to the justification of some human rights) as well as negative (providing justifications for limitations on some people's rights).

The question of the role of desert in justifying human rights applies both to moral human rights and to legal human rights. In the case of legal human rights we can ask what their moral grounds are and whether they include considerations of moral personal desert. For present purposes I will draw my guidance concerning the content of human rights from international law, and particularly from the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR).3 The attraction of legal rights for my purposes is that they have canonical formulations and areas of established content. Although I do not believe that there is a one-to-one relationship between legal human rights and moral human rights, all of the legal rights I mention are ones that can plausibly be held to be moral rights as well.

#### **I. Personal Moral Deserts**

To think about what considerations of desert imply for human rights we need a view of what those considerations are and how they operate. This section offers a sketch. The concept of deserving something is used in a wide variety of areas. We say that a potential student deserves to be admitted because she has the highest grades and test scores, that an exceptionally good painting in a competition deserves to win First Prize, and that areas of natural beauty deserve to be preserved.4 I am interested only in one important slice: the deserts that individual persons have that are due to the moral features of their actions, states of character, and harmful wrongs suffered.5

Because people are agents who choose, plan, deliberate, and act, we often respond to the beneficial or harmful changes their actions bring about in the world with attributions of responsibility and praise or blame.6 As agents, people's deserts can be due to the particular actions they perform (as when a person performs a lifesaving rescue or commits a crime) or to their characters as seen in the high or low level of moral virtue

<sup>3</sup> United Nations, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (both 1966).

<sup>4</sup> These statements about non-moral desert often fit or mimic the generic pattern for desert statements about personal moral desert that is described later.

<sup>5</sup> Important sources on the idea of desert include: Joel Feinberg "Justice and Personal Desert," in *Doing and Deserving* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1970); Fred Feldman, *Utilitarianism, Hedonism, and Desert* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997); Shelly Kagan, *The Geometry of Desert* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012); Louis Pojman and Owen McLeod (eds.), *What Do We Deserve?* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997); and George Sher, *Desert* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987).

<sup>6</sup> See Samuel Scheffler, 'Responsibility, Reactive Attitudes, and Liberalism in Philosophy and Politics,' *Philosophy and Public Affairs*, 21 (1992): 299–323, and Stephen Munzer, *A Theory of Property* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 255–6.

that their actions generally display. An action or character trait that makes someone deserving of something is often called the "desert basis." It is a fact about or evaluation of a person that is the starting point for deliberation about what they deserve. Abe may deserve praise for the high level of moral virtue that he has displayed in his attitudes and actions over many decades (a sort of career achievement award). Juanita may deserve gratitude from Carolina for concern, emotional support, and assistance during Carolina's recent battle with cancer. Bernard may deserve legal punishment for the financial fraud that he recently perpetrated.

Desert bases can be about good or bad behavior and vary in their strength, in how much by way of good or bad treatment they make appropriate. If Carolina decides that words of appreciation alone would not be sufficient as an expression of appreciation to Juanita for what she did, and that a gift is required as well, then she has to decide the size and nature of the gift. To determine what Bernard deserves for his recent crime we need to know the nature and size of the fraud.

Desert bases can be things that one has not done (omissions). If Paul did not steal Fred's motorcycle then he should not be punished for the theft because such punishment would be disproportionate to his innocence. For another example, imagine that Zelda agrees to mow Elmer's lawn for a fee. If Zelda shows up and mows the lawn we can say that she deserves payment for this work. If Zelda never actually mows the lawn or brings it about that the lawn is mowed we can conclude that Zelda does not deserve payment from Elmer for lawn mowing (Zelda might, of course, nevertheless deserve payment from Elmer for doing some other job). Not mowing is the desert basis for not deserving pay-for-mowing.

Some humans lack the ability to generate desert bases through their actions. For example, very young children's agency and moral capacities are so little developed that they may lack desert bases entirely—or at least only have passive ones like "innocent" or "harmed by parental negligence."

To be complete, a statement about what someone deserves has four blanks or variables that must be specified. First, we need to specify the party who deserves something. Second, we need to specify the desert basis, what it is about the party identified that makes them deserving in this context. Third, we need to specify *what* the person deserves by way of good or bad treatment. Finally, we need to identify the party who is called upon or permitted to deliver this treatment. In the pattern,

P1 deserves T from P2 in virtue of having DB

P1 is a person who deserves something, T is some treatment or state of affairs that is deserved, P2 is a person who is permitted or obligated to give or impose T, and DB is the desert basis. The desert relation puts these elements together and asserts that T in its size and nature is permissible or required in light of DB for P2 to give to or impose on P1.7 This is the proportionality aspect of desert. Both T and DB must admit of degrees so that more or less of T can be proportional to more of less of DB.

<sup>7</sup> This schema will need one or more temporal variables as well. One can deserve something at a particular time but later cease to deserve it because of one's behavior in the interim. On this see Kagan, *The Geometry of Desert*, 11–12. Further, we make desert statements in the past tense. An example is "My late brother never got the promotion he deserved."

Some theorists leave the P2 variable out of such an analysis because there seem to be meaningful desert statements in which no second party needs to be or is available to be mentioned. One example is where Martina already has what she deserves (a happy and financially comfortable retirement, say) and someone remarks that it is well deserved because of her virtue and hard work over a lifetime. Here the question of someone *giving* Martina a happy and comfortable retirement does not arise. Another example is where a notorious pirate, Pierre, is operating on the high seas outside the territorial boundaries of any country. Pierre may deserve to be caught and imprisoned but we may nevertheless be unsure about which persons or governments if any are permitted or required to attempt to administer this treatment. In spite of these cases, second parties often play very important role in considerations of desert and I think that it is therefore best to include them in our generic pattern for desert statements.

Because a desert statement like the one in the pattern above includes ". . . in virtue of having DB," it already points to a reason for permitting or requiring T. Proportionality between DB and T is central to the idea of desert—even though there are cases in which very rough proportionality is the best we can hope to achieve. One way to find areas where desert is at work is to look for areas where proportionality judgments are being made between something about a person and some treatment or state of affairs. If one says that "P1 ought to receive T because of F," where "F" is some fact about P1's actions or character, this could be a desert statement if proportionality between T and F is explicitly or implicitly asserted. But it could also fail to be a desert statement if F is not a desert basis requiring proportionality but rather involves some other relation between T and F. Examples of the latter are that T would be useful to P1 in light of F or that T is required in order to treat P1 equally with other people who are F.

Judgments about what people deserve are often difficult to make if we care about getting it right. We rightly worry that we don't know enough about P1 and his or her desert basis (is P1 a competent moral agent, what were P1's intentions, what exactly did P1 do, and were there mitigating circumstances?). And we worry about the nature and scale of T (how can we know how big an award or how severe a punishment is appropriate to P1's DB?).

In cases where T is of substantial value or disvalue to P1, responding appropriately to P1's deserts regarding T is sometimes a type of justice, of giving P1 what is due. If the criminal justice system gets it wrong in Bernard's case and gives him a large punishment when he only deserves a small one then a major injustice is done.

Considerations of moral desert yield conclusions of varying modalities (permissions versus duties) and strengths (high versus medium or low priority in competition with other considerations). Sometimes these considerations merely give a person permission to give a person the treatment he or she deserves, and sometimes they yield both a permission and a duty to do so. Henry's extreme rudeness to Irma may give her permission to reprimand him without making her doing so obligatory. The permission one gets in such cases is not unlimited; proportionality determines how far Irma can go in criticizing Henry. Permissions to respond to people's deserts are far more common than duties to do so, but there are plenty of cases where considerations of desert yield moral duties to respond with appropriate treatment.

The strength of permissions and duties to respond to someone's desert may be fortified in some cases by the usefulness of praising virtuous people like Abe and Juanita, reprimanding rude people like Henry, and punishing criminals like Bernard. In such cases responses to desert are both fitting and useful.

The ways in which one person is "called upon" by another person's desert seem complicated. Carolina had a desert-based duty to Juanita because she was the beneficiary of Juanita's kind assistance. And Irma had permission to reprimand Henry because he was rude *to her*. In other cases, however, a person's desert basis may generate permissions for everyone to respond to him or her. Perhaps anyone who can is permitted to punish Pierre the pirate. Recall Locke's idea that in the state of nature everyone is at liberty to punish crimes, including crimes against other people. And which agents have duties to respond to deserts with appropriate treatments may depend on local institutional arrangements. Locke thought that entering civil society required turning over the punishment of crimes to government.8

Duties to respond appropriately to deserts can be discharged by appropriate responses from the parties. After Carolina has thanked Juanita profusely and offered a small but thoughtful gift she can think of the matter as settled. She has done what it was fitting for her to do, and Juanita has gotten what she deserved. Similarly, when the system of criminal law has subjected Bernard to an appropriate amount of time in prison, and he has given appropriate apologies and compensation to the victims of his crimes, he (and we) can think of his negative deserts for these crimes as having been discharged. His "debt" has been paid. And in his case, the government has met its responsibility to punish with criminal sanctions persons who have severely negative deserts based on criminal behavior.

When not discharged, deserts can continue for an extended period to generate permissions and duties. When Lee's negligence or wrongdoing introduces a large disproportion between what Irving deserves and what he receives, measures to remedy that disproportion are called for during an extended period after the negligence or wrongdoing.

## **II. Qualifications to Human Rights Based on being Undeserving**

A widely accepted feature of human rights is that people have them just by being persons. All people, not just the best behaved, qualify for a set of basic rights. This is, of course, a broad or abstract feature of human right and it requires specification as we move from abstract ideas to particular rights such as freedom of movement and political participation. As we make this transition, considerations of desert, as well as other norms, may introduce opposing tendencies. If desert plays, or were to play, a big role in shaping human rights then the possession and/or operability of those rights could vary with individual deserts.

Personal moral deserts often help determine whether people should receive wages and other rewards, whether or not people should be punished with fines or

8 John Locke, *Second Treatise of Government* (1690), sections 7–13.

imprisonment, and whether people are appropriately esteemed or despised. Because of this it would be surprising if the restrictions of rights to the deserving applied only to welfare rights. My research suggests that the place where we find the most desert-based restrictions to human rights is in rights to the fundamental freedoms and to political participation.

Consider the right to freedom of movement and residence as found in ICCPR Article 12. It says that "1. Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall, within that territory, have the right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose his residence" and "2. Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own." People serving prison terms for crimes for which they were justly convicted do not qualify for this right during their incarceration (and not fully afterwards while they are on parole). It seems plausible that part of the justification for qualifying their right to freedom of movement is that people who are justifiably in prison for crimes have undischarged negative deserts and that responding appropriately to those deserts requires, in many cases, restricting the liberty of movement of persons as part of their punishment. Since prisoners cannot have much freedom of movement, they cannot engage in forms of political expression and protest that require assembling with others or going to a particular place. Thus these qualifications apply not just to freedom of movement but also to freedom of assembly and freedom of expression.

Perhaps this example is not conclusive because it can be argued that these qualifications to the fundamental freedoms are based not on desert but on what is necessary to protect people's security against crime. Perhaps the next example is more persuasive in this respect.

ICCPR Article 25 says that "Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity . . .to have access, on general terms of equality, to public service in his country." This does not mean that every person gets to be a public official for two minutes; rather, it means that citizens of appropriate age have the right to be considered for appointment to public office within a fair selection process or election. People cannot be excluded from public service because they are impoverished, female, or members of an unpopular minority. Persons who have been justly convicted of serious crimes are frequently disqualified from serving in public office while serving time in prison for their crime, and if their crime was serious enough may be permanently disqualified from being a lawyer or judge. Considerations of desert yield the permission to impose such disqualifications. They are not necessary consequences of being in prison (as is limited freedom of movement and residence) since in many cases a person in prison could do her job as a city commissioner, say, if she were allowed easy access to visitors and provided with phones, internet, and video equipment that would allow her to participate virtually in meetings outside the prison. If Kim, an elected city commissioner who has been justly convicted of taking bribes and sent to jail, demands these privileges and services so that she can perform her elected role, officials could—and hopefully would—refuse on the grounds that persons justly convicted of serious crimes are ineligible for public office at least until their negative deserts have been discharged.

At this point the worry about such restrictions being incompatible with the universality of human rights comes back into play. How is the permissibility of denying some people access to political participation to be reconciled with everyone's having a right to such participation? One path to reconciliation is to write into the scope of the right an exception that temporarily excludes from participation persons who are being justly punished for crimes. We would then say that Kim, like everyone else, has the right to political participation but that she falls under one of its exceptions.

Another path to reconciliation says that the universality of human rights is an abstract idea that requires considerable specification and qualification before it is ready to work reliably at the stage where rights are being applied to actual persons and situations. Here we might draw a distinction between exceptions to the scope of a right and qualifications concerning who has it. A human right may have exceptions to its scope while applying to and being claimable by the entire human population. For example, the human right to freedom of religious practice has an exception excluding human sacrifices, but the right is held by the entire human population (or at least that part of it capable of choosing religious beliefs and practices; perhaps it is not held by infants). Let's say that *exceptions* apply to the scope of the right, to what it permits or protects. In contrast, let's say that *qualifications* apply to who can successfully invoke the right in his or her own case. Qualifications use personal characteristics to make a universal right available to only part of the human population.

Not all qualifications in this sense are based on desert. The right to medical care, for example, is need-based. Everyone has the right but they only get to exercise it when they have a medical problem or are scheduled for periodic check ups. A qualified human right begins by saying that "Everyone has the right to. . . " but before it finishes it states qualifications that exclude some people from having or being able to use the right temporarily or permanently. Most human rights do not simply deliver a uniform freedom, protection, or good to everyone, or even everyone willing to accept these things. Qualifications may say, for example, that everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence *unless* they are young children, are serving in the military, or are attempting to enter or reside in a country in which they are not citizens and do not have authorization for entry and residence. Considerations of desert add to this list "unless at present they are justly imprisoned for a crime of which they have been duly convicted."

A number of the human rights in international treaties seem to have only qualified universality. Although formally rights of everyone, their operability in one's case requires that one have some sort of need and willingness to consent (the right to medical care), vulnerability (the right to a fair trial when accused of a crime), ability (the right to serve in public office), or desert. Consequently, we cannot say that putting desert-based qualifications on human rights would so undermine their universality as to make them farcical unless we are prepared to say that the qualifications that we already accept for many international human rights on grounds other than desert also make those rights farcical. The universality of specific human rights is more qualified than one might initially expect.

My suggestion, then, is that we have at least two ways of reconciling desert-based restrictions on the application of human rights with the universality of those rights. The first writes an exception into the scope of the right, and the second weakens the meaning of universality as we move from abstract to specific rights.

## **III. The Positive Role of Desert in the Realm of Human Rights**

Considerations of desert can do more than impose qualifications for the undeserving. They also help justify and shape some human rights. In this section I again proceed by identifying some human rights that seem to be supported by considerations of desert. Some but not all of these pertain to crimes and punishments.

## **A.╇ The right of the innocent against punishment**

The desert basis for criminal punishments is having committed a crime. People who have committed no crimes do not deserve to be punished for crimes (although they might deserve to be criticized or penalized for other moral failings). In relation to criminal punishments their desert basis is zero. Criminal punishments that involve large fines and/or long-term imprisonment have the potential to be seriously harmful and unjust if erroneously imposed. Perfection in allocating punishments to the guilty is unavailable to humans, even when trials are carefully conducted and due process rights respected. Still, a human right of innocent persons against intentional or negligent criminal punishments is strongly supported by considerations of desert. This right protects against one of the most severe forms of disproportionality between desert basis and treatment. Due process rights are means of preventing the punishment of the innocent and hence receive some indirect support from considerations of desert.

## **B.╇ The right against grossly disproportionate punishments**

Almost as bad as punishing the innocent is punishing with very severe criminal punishments a person who has committed a minor crime. Considerations of desert require proportionality and condemn large departures from it. Human rights requiring that punishments be proportional to crimes committed seem to be at least partially desert-based. Although these rights are universal, individual variations in regard to innocence and levels of criminal guilt lead to different specific prescriptions for different people.

An explicit proportionality clause is not found in the European Convention or in the ICCPR (although judges have found a foothold for it in the requirement that punishments not be cruel).9 The recent European Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Treaty of Lisbon sets it out explicitly, however, in Article 49.3: "The severity of penalties must not be disproportionate to the criminal offence." This principle is also clearly present in ICCPR Article 6 which sets out the right to life. Section 6.3 says that: "In countries which have not abolished the death penalty, sentence of death may be imposed only for the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in force at the

<sup>9</sup> See Dirk van Zyl Smit and Andrew Ashworth, "Disproportionate Sentences as Human Rights Violations," *Modern Law Review*, 67 (2004): 541–60.

time of the commission of the crime..." Execution, as one of the most severe punishments, may only be used—if at all—for the most serious crimes.

#### **C.╇ Remedies for violations of human rights**

Being a victim of a serious and harmful moral wrong is a desert basis that calls for some sort of compensation or remedy. I do not mean to assert that all plausible claims to compensation are matters of desert. Grounds for compensation are wider than this. Nevertheless, some claims to compensation are claims to what is deserved. If Bernard takes Hilda's savings into his fraudulent "investment fund" and spends the money on a yacht, when Bernard's wrongful conduct is revealed Hilda deserves repayment. Other desert-based compensation decisions may involve desert-for-fault in an accident. Being at fault for an accident can make it permissible for the party at fault to be required to pay the costs of the accident.

Negligent and intentional violations of human rights are generally serious and harmful moral wrongs and hence call for compensation or some other form of remedy. ICCPR Article 2.3 sets out a right to a remedy for human rights violations that individuals have suffered: "[A]ny person whose rights or freedoms as herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy, notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity." Further, ICCPR Articles 9 and 14 require, respectively, compensation for unlawful arrest and detention and compensation for convictions that are shown conclusively to be miscarriages of justice.

Compensation partially removes the disproportionate loss suffered by an innocent person who is unjustly arrested, detained, convicted, or punished. Remedies include not only stopping the violation if it is still occurring but also attempting to undo or compensate for wrongs and harms suffered in the past. Suppose that a judge decides on appeal that an imprisoned person, Ivana, is innocent and orders her to be released but that prison officials negligently fail to release her. When Ivana again appeals to the courts for release she can very plausibly say that as an innocent person she deserves her freedom, that prison officials are failing to give her the freedom that is her due. Considerations of desert come into play in a case like this, requiring that innocent persons not be subject to continued punishment after their innocence has been certified. For the innocent, any size of punishment is disproportionately large.

#### **D.╇ Work and wages**

If income is mainly provided through wages or salaries for work, a right to fair wages protects people against nonpayment and earnings that are low to the extent of being grossly disproportionate to labor and contribution. The ICESCR deals with work in Articles 6 to 8. Article 7 deals with "just and favorable conditions of work" and sets out at 7 A (i) a clear proportionality principle. Countries ratifying the treaty are to ensure "[f]air wages and equal remuneration for work of equal value . . . " Fairness here is taken to require that women be guaranteed "equal pay for equal work."10 People vary greatly in the value of the work they perform or can perform, and the kind of fairness required here is proportionality. The proportionality is both vertical (if one improves the value of one's work substantially this should improve the size of one's wage) and horizontal (different people doing work of the same value should receive roughly the same wage). The value of work is difficult to estimate so we cannot expect that the application of this principle will be precise. Further, the value of the work a person can do depends partially on cooperation from others and on available materials, tools, and technology.

We speak of the wages from work as "earnings" and "compensation." In the ideal scenario, Zelda makes a contribution through work and the beneficiaries compensate her with wages that are roughly equal to the value of her contribution. ICESCR Article 15.1(c) applies this idea to people who do creative work. It says that participating countries "recognize the right of everyone: . . .To benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author."

## **IV. If the Principle of Desert is Operative within the Realm of Human Rights, Why isn't its Influence Stronger?**

In previous sections I have argued that considerations of desert not only qualify some human rights but also provide significant justificatory support for some human rights. The question to be addressed here is why desert's role is not even larger. If it is already within the realm, why isn't it in total command? Why, for example, aren't more human rights subject to desert-based qualifications?

#### **A.╇ Considerations of desert have weak normative force**

One possible explanation is that considerations of desert are just not very strong, even in the cases where they are strongest. On this view these considerations are simply not in the same league as norms such as the right to life, the right to lead one's life, welfare, rights against severe cruelty and unfairness, and rights to moral and social equality. I am inclined to this view, and think that considerations of desert are frequently middleweight considerations. They are often outweighed by other norms and seem to play a large role in government and policy only when running in tandem with and imposing only mild limits on stronger norms such as security and welfare. Still, the normative force of considerations of desert should not be underestimated. They can generate duties and not just permissions (and permissions can be very significant). And violations of the duties they generate can be substantial moral and legal wrongs. For example, suppose that a homeowner, Kevin, engages a day laborer, Leonidas, for a week of work in Kevin's rock garden. Leonidas works hard and well for the entire week and then asks for his wages. Kevin, knowing that Leonidas is undocumented and therefore unlikely to seek legal remedies, falsely says that his work was inadequate and pays him for only one day.

<sup>10</sup> See also United Nations, Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (1979), Article 11.d.

#### **B.╇ Desert's application is information and judgment intensive**

Assessing and responding appropriately to people's desert bases is far from easy. This makes the application of the considerations of desert expensive to administer and prone to mistakes. One difficulty is that it is that the characteristics that form the basis for some reward or punishment are often matters of controversy. For example, is the basis for fair wages expending effort at work, making a relevant contribution through one's work, or both? And even if we can agree that both contribution and effort are relevant to fair wages, how do we combine and weigh them?

Another difficulty is that high-quality administration of deserts is information intensive. Finding out someone's levels of effort and contribution on the job requires observation, evaluation, and record keeping over an extended period. This is, of course, something that many employers do, but it is expensive and difficult.

Further, judging proportionality is difficult, contextual, and frequently comparative. Even when we know that a particular carpenter, Marvin, is highly skilled, works hard, and produces good results, it is still hard to know what wages are appropriate for him without appealing to what similar workers are paid in local labor markets. Because proper use of the considerations of desert typically requires judgment at many points, error and abuse are serious possibilities. I do not think that this is fatal to the use of considerations of desert, but it does help to explain why norms that are simpler to use sometimes prevail.

Consider an example. Crudely, the human right to health has at least three parts with somewhat different grounds and appropriate distributive principles. The first part is public health measures such as clean water, sanitation, and vaccinations. Here public goods are being created that to be enjoyed by most must be enjoyed by all. Even prisoners must be included if they are not to be sources of danger to the general population. The second part contains parts of health care that are relatively inexpensive but produce very valuable results for people's health and productivity. These would include care for mothers and infants, antibiotics, and low-cost treatments for broken bones and other injuries. Given how mistake-prone and information- and judgment-intensive administering these services on the basis of desert would be, it is simply too much trouble. The third part of the right to health is highcost treatments and therapies that possibly could be administered partially on the basis of personal desert—and that, in cases of competition for scarce resources such as organs for transplant, sometimes in fact are. But even here other distributive principles that are need- or welfare- or dignity-based compete with the considerations of desert and often win.

#### **C.╇ Most people's deserts are the same or similar in many areas**

It is incorrect to assume that desert bases always vary among persons. There are treatments in regard to which everyone has the same deserts because those treatments are ones that no one deserves. When everyone has the same desert bases the resulting prescription is equality. Further, even in areas where people's desert bases vary most people's deserts are fairly similar. Desert bases, like other human characteristics, probably form a bell curve. A few people are exceptionally virtuous in their character and actions, and in the other tail of the bell curve a few people are exceptionally lacking in virtue and behave very badly. Most of us, however, are average or not too far from it and hence are bunched in the fat middle. As morally average or even mediocre, our desert bases are not large or interesting enough to make imperative desert's operation in the realm of human rights.

#### **D. Giving government a large role in monitoring and recording people's desert bases risks turning it into Big Brother**

People that I tell about this essay often respond with worries about who is going to monitor and judge everyone's deserts. They think it is dangerous to give governments a job that only an all-knowing and wise God could perform well. Decisions that are information- and judgment-intensive are often abuse prone. And this worry becomes especially intense if the enjoyment of our most basic rights becomes conditional on government decisions about what we deserve.

One response to this worry is to remind ourselves that all of the world's governments use law and threats of legal sanctions to govern, to collect taxes, to protect their citizens, and to implement human rights. Law enforcement requires monitoring people's actions to see if they are in compliance with the law. In particular, the criminal law in every country prohibits actions such as murder, rape, theft, and fraud that provide the bases for negative deserts. Consequently, every government monitors these bases to some extent. The criminal law is indeed one of the most dangerous parts of government but over the centuries humans have developed means such as due process rights of limiting its dangers and those means are now prescribed by international human rights. Further, investigations of the bases of people's deserts can be conducted in response to individual complaints or lawsuits. In this way the attention of government officials can be directed to the desert bases of some people without governments having to monitor everyone's behavior.

Secondly, many believe that besides legal human rights there are also moral human rights, and that these moral rights pertain to interpersonal relations and not just to what governments should do. For example, Griffin's view of human rights is worked up within philosophical ethics and deals with rights against other persons as much as with rights against governments. Claims about what governments can and should do say little about whether the considerations of desert can influence *moral* human rights that operate in the realm of interpersonal relations.

Finally, considerations of desert do not just present dangers; they also justify protections. As we saw in rights against punishing the innocent, rights against punishments that are disproportionately severe, rights to remedies for violations of human rights, and rights to wages that are not disproportionately small in relation to work and contribution, considerations of desert help justify some important protections.

## **V. Conclusion**

Normative considerations, like actors, can play bigger or smaller roles in a production. In human rights theory, considerations of personal desert could play a starring role (although this seems unlikely), a major role along with some bigger stars, a significant but modest role, or a very minor role. I have attempted to show that principles of desert can and do play a significant but modest role in the realm of human rights. Not only do considerations of desert justify qualifications and limits to rights; they also provide justifications for human rights protections against disproportionate treatment in areas where proportionality between desert basis and treatment is required. If my arguments are plausible, quick and undefended dismissals of desert from human rights theorizing should no longer be acceptable.