---
title: "Religious Liberty Conceived as a Human Right"
author:
  - name: "Robert Audi"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "407–422"
citation_key: "audi2015liberty"
---

## <span id="page-421-0"></span> [Religious Liberty Conceived as a Human Right](#page-8-8)

#### *Robert Audi*

Rights are better than gold. Their value is incalculably great; they cannot be lost by theft; and—in principle—they protect us from myriad harms. At the national level, the rights backed by government constitute deontic capital whose value is incommensurable with its gold reserves, and their protection is more important than gross national product. But rights are also harder to identify than gold; their quality is not measurable in any straightforward way; and the rights possessed by others automatically affect ours. The notion of a religion is perhaps no easier to clarify than that of a right. The question, then, of whether there is a human right to religious liberty is doubly difficult. That question is central for Lorenzo Zucca in "Freedom of Religion in a Secular World"1 and it will also be central in this paper, which explores his highly informative essay at several important points.

### **I. A Broad Conception of Rights**

My concern here is mainly moral rights, but legal rights, which commonly align with them—often by resting on a different ground supporting the same content—will also figure in the discussion. On any conception of rights, moral, legal, or more narrowly institutional, they are the sorts of things that may be (among other things) claimed, asserted, respected, violated, and forfeited. Human rights such as the right to free speech, can be claimed on a moral basis even if not under law. Presumably some rights, such as the right not to be enslaved, are "inalienable" and hence cannot be transferred; some, such as the right not to be punished for a deed one has not done, may also be plausibly held to be incapable of forfeit.

#### **A.╇ Sketch of a conception of rights**

It is difficult to find a clear unifying notion of a right. Perhaps the most we can hope for is to identify a core idea that, interpreted broadly, provides the basis for account. On my view—which I sketch to clarify the discussion to follow—a right, in what seems the most basic sense, is (roughly and in very broad terms) a defeasible normative protection from a certain kind of coercive conduct, such as suppression of free speech.2

<sup>1</sup> This volume, ch. 21, 388. All subsequent references to ch. 21 appear parenthetically in the text.

<sup>2</sup> The overall account of rights in this section is based in large part on the sketch of rights presented in Robert Audi, *The Good in the Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value* (Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2004), ch. 5 and developed in "Wrongs within Rights".

I do not claim that every notion of a right is reducible to this one; but the sense roughly characterized here is at least most relevant for our topic.

Three qualifications are essential. The first concerns the scope of "coercive conduct". To include the rights not to be killed or harmed in certain other ways that do not compel one to *do* anything, we must take killing and such harms as temporarily drugging someone as limiting cases of coercive conduct. They forcibly *prevent* doing anything even if they compel no *act*. What they may be said to compel, then, is omissions. Secondly, *normative* protection is understood broadly to encompass legal norms: as a (defeasible) justification for prohibiting the acts in question—morally prohibiting them where the right is moral, legally doing so if it is legal—and of course the same range of acts might be prohibited or required under both a moral and a legal right, which might bear the same name. Although my concern is not legal rights but rather moral and human rights, I am particularly interested in legal rights, such as the right to hold religious services, because they protect human rights.

The third qualification concerns rights sometimes called *entitlements.* To see these in relation to the basic conception just sketched, we must conceive coercive acts broadly enough to bear appropriately on rights to have promises to one kept and rights not to be lied to (promissory and veracity obligations represent major bases of entitlements). In part, the idea is that such violations tend to limit our choices. There may be no particular thing we must do; but we may well be forced to do things we otherwise would not have had to do. To be sure, where the right is to have a promise honored, the protection from coercion does have this specificity: we are protected from being forced to relinquish our claim or forbear from asserting it. This leaves open, however, what, if anything, we must do *given* that forcible relinquishment.

My broad notion of protection from coercive conduct applies most clearly to rights *to do certain things,* by contrast with rights *against having certain things done to oneself.* But the notion is nonetheless clarifying, particularly if, as I assume here, rights are above all (though not entirely) a kind of protection of agency.3 Physical harms tend to impair agency and thereby to force us to perform compensatory actions and forgo others. A rights violation need not compel the victim to do a particular thing, but they do characteristically force one either to choose among options that, from the moral point of view, are inappropriately limited or at least to do something in a way that, given the right, is morally objectionable. Thus, lies might put desirable options out of reach; and (to illustrate the second case) a broken promise might force one to undertake something without the promised help, even if one can still manage it. Similarly, privacy violations might force me to listen to loud music or the blare of bell ringing that calls people to prayer. This last case also shows that a rights violation need not

<sup>3</sup> My view is similar in some ways to James Griffin's in *On Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008). For him, human rights "can be seen as protections of our human standing . . .our personhood" (33), to which agency is central: one can break down the notion of personhood into clearer components by breaking down the notion of agency" (33). Moreover, human rights can also be *grounded* in personhood (33–7). . . Space does not permit comparison here, but a detailed and informative discussion of Griffin's view, including its relation to the notion of dignity, is provided by Charles R. Beitz in *The Idea of Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 60–8.

cause what is ordinarily considered harm, except insofar as reducing one's options is itself a kind of harm.

#### **B.╇ The specification of rights**

Regardless of our theory of what it is to have a right, to specify to what a given right amounts we must indicate at least four kinds of information. One or more of these are often unclear in discussions of rights.

First, it must be clear who has the right, the *possessor*: whoever is protected by it, say all human beings, and may also justifiedly claim it (or have it claimed by proxy). By extension, groups of people and even organizations can possess rights. Secondly, the *addressee*—the person(s) against whom a right is held—must be specified for full clarification of a right, though they may never be mentioned in describing the conduct within the scope of the right, including, for instance, free religious expression. Thirdly the *content* of the right—the conduct it protects (or prohibits) and concerning which the addressee (and possibly others) owe the possessor(s) non-interference—must be indicated. This is normally specifiable behaviorally: say *to* vote for representatives in one's government or *not to* be incarcerated without charges. Rights are commonly named using just nouns, as with the "right to life." Such nominal specification enhances the difficulty of seeing what their possession entails. Infinitival specification makes it easier to see that they are not closed under entailment. A right to remove an appendix does not entail a right to do *either* that or euthanize the patient.4 Fourth, understanding a right requires knowing its *domain*, say moral or legal—the normative realm in which criticism or sanctions are (prima facie) in order for non-performance of the relevant conduct. Applying these points to our topic, a right to religious liberty would be *possessed* by anyone who can do religious deeds or engage in religious expression; *addressed* to anyone who might restrict such action, especially governments and organizations; in *content* as comprehensive as the religious actions in question (to be described in Section III); and (arguably), in *domain*, intrinsically moral and hence a prima facie candidate for legal status as well.

#### **C.╇ The defeasibility of rights**

The suggested conception of rights is akin to a Rossian conception of prima facie duties. I have argued elsewhere5 that—*given* their grounds—these duties are ineradicable, hence cannot be deprived of all normative significance. But they remain defeasible, as where a right to send text messages is overridable by others' rights not to be endangered by distracted driving and where religious freedom to make sacrifices may be restricted by the right not to be killed. For certain ascriptions of rights, say a general right to freedom of speech, it is arguable, as it is for certain principles of prima facie

<sup>4</sup> There are many technical difficulties concerning the content, individuation, and entailment relations among rights, but I am suggesting that their content be specifiable in a fine-grained way appropriate to relation to intentions to perform the acts crucial for their exercise.

<sup>5</sup> In Audi, *The Good in the Right*, eg ch. 1, 23–4, where there is much discussion of W. D. Ross's now classic *The Right and the Good* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1930).

duty, that these ascriptions are self-evident. As in the case of duties, this self-evidence does not preclude rights' being grounded (or at least groundable) in something else, including principles. I take the self-evident to be knowable without epistemic reliance on independent evidence, but this does not entail that there can *be* no such evidence.6

Given the number of rights that fall under the conception presented here, one might think all possible human action is in their *scope*, in the sense that for any person, P, and act-type, A, either P has a right to A or someone has a right against P that precludes P's A-ing. But there are possible deeds, such as taking a bracelet glistening in the sun on a deserted beach, that none of us has a right to do or a right to prevent others from doing.7 There *is* a right not to be prevented *by force* as one attempts to pick up the bracelet; but this is a special case of some other right, such as the right to freedom of action. This is not a right to be protected from others taking it if they get to it first.

The case illustrates that there are permissible acts that are neither protected by rights nor forbidden by rights. This may be a special case of the point that moral obligation does not cover all acts—in the sense that all come under a moral *ought* or *ought not*. Having some coffee at an airport is discretionary, hence permissible in the sense that it is not wrong: though I do not have a right to have it on demand, no one has a right to prevent me from having some (if I ask and pay), and I am neither obligated to have it nor obligated not to have it. Some religious acts, such as burning celebratory incense, are similarly discretionary.

The partial sketch of rights is meant to supply a conception that, though incomplete, is adequate to the normative purpose of the paper: to support the view that there is a human right to religious liberty (even if it derives from some broader right); to clarify that right in a way that indicates how it may be plausibly regarded as special; and to indicate some of the conditions under which it is overriddable.

### **II. Some Contrasting Conceptions of Human Rights**

Against this background, we can learn much from considering Zucca's concern with *human* rights. The notion of a human right has become increasingly important since the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) (adopted in 1948), but I have found no single conceptual characterization that is both clear and widely accepted. Its Article 1 begins "All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights." With that and other elements of the Declaration and later documents in mind, one might take human rights to be natural rights—roughly, those we have by virtue of human nature: consequentially upon being human. On this view, *basic* human rights would be a subset of natural rights.8 Given the breadth of the Declaration, however,

<sup>6</sup> This conception of the self-evident is clarified and defended in Audi, *The Good in the Right*, ch. 2 (where the conception is contrasted with that of Moore and Ross).

<sup>7</sup> In the terminology of Wesley Hohfeld, this might be called a privilege or a "no-right," where (in line with my point in the text) the *absence* of a right is on the part of the other party. For a lucid brief discussion of the Hohfeldian conception of rights, see William A. Edmundson, *An Introduction to Rights* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), esp. 88–95.

<sup>8</sup> This volume, ch. 21, 403.

one is inclined to conclude that the category of human rights is wider than this implies. Let me elaborate.

Might the category of human rights be that of *general moral rights*? That of *dignity-based rights*, or *flourishing-based rights*? These all entail protections from coercion, and they include, by the kind of extension described earlier, certain entitlements. The acts that lie within the content of these rights are taken to be crucial for maintaining dignity or achieving flourishing (or both). Both dignity and flourishing conceptions might be suggested by Article 22:

Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization, through national effort and international co-operation and in accordance with the organization and resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality.

Other articles of the Declaration suggest that human rights include what might be called *nation-based*, or, more broadly, *governmental-community-based*, rights, roughly those that are or should be recognized wherever people fall under laws, as is suggested by Article 6, which says simply "Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law." Perhaps "institutionally-based" would cover both nation-based and governmental-community based cases, on the assumptions that (1) if a community has laws, then it has some institutional framework even if not a government proper and (2) institutions might have rules that confer rights even if the institutions are not governmental and the rights have sufficiently wide and strong support, as could be the case with certain international institutions. The relation of any of these conceptions to that of a natural right is complex. There are no laws in a state of nature; but arguably natural rights imply such *conditional* rights as to be treated equally before laws *if* one is subject to them, as in a nation or a community, such as a provincial or even tribal government, with law-making authority. The same would hold for institutional rules with coercive authority (or perhaps simply moral authority), even if those rules are not strictly speaking laws.9

To be sure, at least some human rights could be included in the kind of special rights *conferred* by human actions. One would be the right to have governmental promises to us kept. This in turn may imply an entitlement right to be given health care. This is of course not a natural right. The theoretical point here is that a right *implied by* a natural right, say to have promises to one kept, together with contingent facts, say that a government promises health care, need not itself be a natural right. Human rights, then, can have natural rights as their foundation (or their normative core) even if some are quite different in kind, say in content, from natural rights.

<sup>9</sup> The kind of protectiveness conception of rights I have sketched is broad enough to accommodate these conceptions of human rights, even if it cannot be stretched to include all the individual rights called human rights in one or another document. The conception also incorporates rationales commonly associated with two different theories of the basis of rights: the "interest theory," on which rights function to protect their holder's interests, and "choice theory," on which rights function to protect their holder's freedom of choice. For critical discussion of these two conceptions, see Edmundson, *An Introduction to Rights*, 120–32, and John Tasioulas, "Human Rights, Universality and the Values of Personhood: Retracing Griffin's Steps," *European Journal of Philosophy*, 10(1) (2002): 79–100.

There is, however, still another way to conceive human rights: as those that are internationally recognized as normative protections of the kinds described earlier. The idea of natural rights is likely a major element in shaping such consensus as there is on the international scene; but, as our discussion will suggest, the two approaches are quite different, and we might speculate that the former is more likely to anchor philosophical discussion of human rights and the latter is more likely to anchor legal discussion of them.

This difference in anchoring conceptions is easy to overlook because many human rights, conceived in the first way, are protected by law in most legal systems; this implies an identity of scope between pairs of rights in question, which often bear the same name, say 'a right to freedom of religion'. But we should not take that to imply equivalence of the rights. The grounds are different, and in the legal case there is an at least implicit protection-enforcement structure not entailed by the existence of human rights. One might take human rights to be a subset of natural rights, but this is far from being uncontroversial.10 By contrast with my conception of human rights as, on any plausible conception, supported at least by conditional moral rights, Zucca's may be quasi-legal or otherwise in some way institutional. In neither case do I see any reason to take him to imply *reducibility* of human rights to either legal ones or to any other institutional notions, but I would like more clarity on whether he takes it to be a necessary condition for a human right that it be in a certain way institutionally described and defended. He says, for example,

I find it difficult to pin down a precise enough meaning of the HRFR [human right to freedom of religion]; and as a consequence my suggestion is that the HRFR has a very limited role to play at the international level.

There are several reasons for this. To begin with the nature of freedom of religion heavily depends on historical contingencies at the domestic level (section 2). Moreover, the practice of freedom of religion shows that the scope and strength of the right can only be determined in relation to the local understanding of religion and what it means to be free for a religion. As a result, supranational institutions adjudicate on these issues by displaying a great deference to national institutions that are better positioned to evaluate local practices" (389)

In the same vein, he later says, "I agree with Raz that human rights are themselves very much dependent 'on the contingencies of the current system of international relations'. It is in this sense that human rights lack a foundation, that is, their practice cannot be described as being grounded in a fundamental moral concern" (404).

One important question here is whether the focus is on human rights conceived as (in the basic cases) natural and—I take it—therefore a normative basis for sound law making, or on legal rights. Surely, if we conceive human rights as possessed by human

<sup>10</sup> It seems at odds with the approach of those who see human (and moral) rights as grounded in dignity, at least where that notion is associated with the Kantian tradition or indeed with the idea that possessors of dignity have *intrinsic value.* For a view that makes use of socio-cultural elements in describing dignity, see Jeremy Waldron's *Dignity, Rank, and Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), Lecture 1. Informative discussion of the relation between dignity and rights is also provided in the works cited earlier by Beitz and Griffin. See too Jeremy Waldron, "Is Dignity the Foundation of Human Rights?" this volume, ch. 5 and Pablo Gilabert, "Human Rights, Human Dignity, and Power," this volume, ch. 10.

#### *Robert Audi* 413

beings *as such,* then they do not depend "on the contingencies of the current system of international relations." Their *protection* might so depend. Even their recognition might. But I do not think Zucca intends to treat human rights in general as grounded only in conventions or other contingencies. Perhaps, to be sure, he would conceive some of them as a special case of these, say one in which the protections in question are universally agreed to be warranted. But this does not seem to be his meaning, especially given his emphasis on lack of consensus on normative questions.

A weaker condition would be that human rights must possess a certain kind of *institutionalizability.* This would go with both the idea that such rights should be *claimable* in a governmental framework—or an institutional non-governmental one such as that of the UN—and with Zucca's idea (following Raz perhaps) that they depend on the contingencies of international relations. My preference is to take the practicability of citing human rights in various documents or statutes to have this dependence but (as Zucca might agree) to take their basis to be non-contingent facts about the normative status of human beings. The idea that we have normative status may or may not be taken to entail (or depend on) our having natural rights.

Another important question is whether the frequent variant local understandings of religion Zucca refers to imply that "the HRFR has a very limited role to play at the international level." To be sure, we must distinguish, as Zucca does, between an international role in justifying *intervention* and one justifying only non-military kinds of support. In suggesting that a human right to religious liberty might play an international role, I am leaving aside the complicated question of when rights violations rise to the level of justifying intervention. One point bearing on the question of whether there is *any* kind of religious liberty right is that understandings can vary around a core of agreement, as where, for most candidates for the category of religion, virtually everyone (who has the relevant concepts) agrees on whether to include them as religion, but, on peripheral cases, there is widespread disagreement among the same people. A further point is that people can have general ethical and political conceptions that dispose them to accept certain carefully formulated statements of religious liberty rights, even if they begin with different ideas of what these should be. Actual beliefs may be a poor indication of the potential for agreement given a good statement of a position that has universal plausibility or can be made plausible in different terms for different cultures or particular people.

#### **III. Religion as a Multiple-Criterion Concept**

These considerations raise the question whether we should seek or try to construct a definition of "religion" that might help to sustain a case for a human right to freedom of religion—or at least to clarify its scope, ie, the behaviors it protects. The definitions of "religion" I am acquainted with seem to be inadequate, but rather than discuss them I will propose a *conception* of religion and a strategy for discussing religious freedom in the light of it. The conception derives from the idea, perhaps initially given detailed development by Wittgenstein, that some concepts are such that we understand them in terms of a number of criteria no one of which is individually necessary or sufficient.

Here are nine criteria that apparently determine whether a social practice (or even a practice by an individual) constitutes a religion. In calling them *criteria*, I am implying that each is conceptually relevant to, even if not strictly necessary for, a social institution's constituting a religion or (as applied to individuals) to an individual's having a religion. In part, this is to say that to fail to see the relevance of any one of them to the applicability of the concept of a religion implies at least some lack of understanding of the concept. Here are the criteria: (1) appropriately internalized belief in one or more supernatural beings (gods); (2) observance of a distinction between sacred and profane objects; (3) ritual acts focused on those objects; (4) a moral code believed to be sanctioned by the god(s); (5) religious feelings (awe, mystery, etc.) that tend to be aroused by the sacred objects and during rituals; (6) prayer and other communicative forms concerning the god(s); (7) a worldview according the individual a significant place in the universe; (8) a more or less comprehensive organization of life based on the worldview; and (9) a social organization bound together by (1)–(8).11

This characterization is very broad, but that may be desirable for our topic. For instance, it leaves open whether the social practice in question has votaries, or enough to be de facto *social*; it is neutral concerning whether the ethical element implies a divine command theory of morality; and, even apart from rituals concerning sacred objects, it leaves open there being right and wrong ways to treat such objects. This breadth is desirable. It is better to avoid too narrow a conception of religion than to err on the side of excessively restricting the notion. To be sure, there are dangers of an overboard definition. One might overextend privileges that may burden society in certain ways, such as tax exemptions for churches and legal permissions to use certain drugs in religious rituals. Definitional breadth, however, tends to be preferable for a free society, and certainly for a liberal democracy, over an unduly narrow conception of religion, since that breadth means protecting liberty and equality more widely than would be likely on too narrow a conception.

If this approach to understanding the concept of religion is taken, do we then have an explanation of why, as Zucca holds, "people disagree as to whether religion deserves special protection, and nobody agrees on what exactly religion covers" (389)? The approach can certainly help to explain these phenomena, but it also leads to caution about exaggerating the amount of disagreement there is *on concrete cases.* There is no reason to expect even near universal agreement on a definition, provided I am correct in thinking that no conventional definition will suffice—and, in any case, people tend to be very poor at framing (or even assessing) definitions that capture their own usage. And if the reference is to the thesis that "religion deserves

<sup>11</sup> These features are stressed by William P. Alston in *Philosophy of Language* (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964), 88 (I have abbreviated and slightly revised his list). This characterization does not entail that religions must be theistic, but even in non-theistic religions, the relevant moral code tends to be given a somewhat similar privileged status in relation to other items on this list, such as the sacred and profane, and certain rituals. It is noteworthy that in *United States v. Seeger*, 380 US 163 (1965), the Supreme Court ruled that religious belief need not be theistic; but theistic religions raise the most important church–state issues at least for many societies.

special protection," again there is too much abstractness to expect full convergence among thoughtful people.

Let us be more concrete. Is there *reasonable* disagreement about whether government should protect people's right to participate in religious activities peacefully and in buildings properly maintained for the purpose and to form voluntary associations with the same civil rights possessed by secular associations, such as trade unions and political parties? I doubt that there is such disagreement, at least in "advanced" countries not under totalitarian rule. It should also be pointed out that similar problems arise for the matter of *political* liberty. The vagueness of our unavoidable descriptive language is a challenge to sound law making and plausible theorizing, but neither activity is thereby rendered impossible.

Three further clarifications are needed. First, on these criteria, a person can be religious without belonging to an institutional religion. Secondly, secularity is no easier to characterize than religion and has similar vagueness. It is clarifying, however, to note that secularity in individuals is compatible with their being *spiritual*, for instance sensitive to what lies beyond appearances, temperamentally meditative, and not "materialistic" in their pursuits and values. Spirituality, then, is compatible not only with being non-religious but with *secularism*, which, taken in the strongest common sense of the term, is a position both calling for strong separation of church and state and implying opposition to religious worldviews as, for instance, not rational or politically divisive. Secularity in a person is thus compatible with, but does not entail, secularism.

The third clarification appropriate here concerns a contrast between the view I am proposing on the "definition problem" regarding religion, and one which Zucca takes to be significant, though he does not endorse it. He says,

[Brian] Leiter offers two elements, which he regards as central: categoricity of belief and insulation from evidence. Categoricity refers to the stringency of beliefs in guiding behavior. Insulation from evidence addresses the way in which religion relates to the knowledge of the world that we have on the basis of common sense or science. Religion, being based on faith, is not responsive to reason, Leiter argues, and this insulates religion from the requirement of evidential proofs (393).

In a critical vein, Zucca says,

Leiter assesses religion from the viewpoint of an exclusive naturalistic worldview, which presupposes a conflict between science and religion. . .faith is the source of unwarranted beliefs, as they cannot be supported by scientific evidence, indeed they are insulated from it. But this assumes too much, namely that all the beliefs we hold on the basis of faith are incompatible with scientific evidence. This cannot be true, in particular in relation to moral beliefs that are inherited from religious convictions. It also wrongly assumes that those religious beliefs that are incompatible with scientific evidence cannot be revised or put aside . . .people of faith and religious institutions are prepared, albeit sometimes reluctantly, to change their beliefs on the strength of contrary scientific evidence (394).

Here I largely agree with Zucca and want to clarify and amplify his points. We may differ on whether religious beliefs are all "held on the basis of faith," though Zucca does not explicitly affirm this and might recognize that such philosophers of religion as Richard Swinburne are at once scientifically oriented and armed with arguments for theistic conclusions.12 One should also recall here the Thomistic tradition and other philosophical approaches in which natural facts are taken to entail God's existence or, as with the argument from design, render it highly probable. On the matter of moral beliefs, Zucca is right to treat these as different in kind from scientific beliefs: *non*scientific but not *un*scientific, as I would put it. He is also correct in noting that many religious people are prepared to given up certain religious beliefs in the light of scientific evidence. Many have qualified beliefs drawn from scripture in the light of the theory of evolution.

A general point I would make here (with which I think Zucca and many others can agree) is that science is not fundamentally metaphysical. If so, scientific practice and, more broadly, a scientific habit of mind, do not commit one to philosophical naturalism, the kind Leiter apparently presupposes, as distinct from methodological naturalism.13 Theism as a metaphysical view, then, as opposed to various claims made by theists that they consider religious, is not in conflict with scientific findings and theories.

One further point essential here is perhaps implicit in what Zucca says and certainly consistent with it. I refer to the need to qualify Leiter's claim that religion is in part defined by categoricity: "Categoricity refers to the stringency of beliefs in guiding behavior."14 This is not an element in all religion. Indeed, the very idea is philosophical and not found in any scripture I am aware of. One might think it is implied by such commandments as "Thou shalt love thy God with all thy heart. . . " But first, love alone does not imply any such privileging of the pronouncements made by the beloved; and, secondly, there is the matter of a religious person's criteria of identity for a genuine divine pronouncement. One might think God infallible but still not take any pronouncement, at least any by a human being or even a high-ranking cleric or a revered scripture, to be categorical in the relevant sense. Indeed, one might have an ethical view on which any pronouncement that goes against, say, protection of human rights, is to be attributed to a source other than God. Even absolute love might be guided by a sense of the moral character of the beloved. The conviction that God is loving and just could in practice far outweigh the conviction that an apparently divine command requires hatred, or injustice. Morality can influence theological interpretation quite as much as theology can influence the sense of moral obligation.

Suppose that religion does not require of its adherents either indifference to evidence or unswerving obedience to religiously endorsed injunctions. Zucca can grant

13 This view, and the constituent notions of naturalism are clarified in Robert Audi, *Rationality and Religious Commitment* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2011), ch. 10.

14 Brian Leiter, *Why Tolerate Religion* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012) 33–7.

<sup>12</sup> See, e.g., Richard Swinburne, *The Existence of God* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004). Zucca himself cites Alvin Plantinga, who, though avowedly committed to the view that theistic belief does not *require* arguments based on evidence, offers many arguments from non-religious facts to theistic conclusions.

this and still be quite properly concerned with the vagueness of the notion of religion. But how much clarity about it is needed for an ethical theory of religious liberty rights or even a theory of the relation between governmental and other institutions and religion? And in particular, is *greater* clarity required than we need for an adequate theory of freedom of expression independent of subject-matter?

We must also be careful not to underestimate the clarity that comes with a good understanding of paradigms. Take Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. A conception of religion that does justice to these three will include many other cases and will usefully guide much normative reflection on the right to religious expression. Moreover, even apart from the extent to which we can understand the notion of religion in terms of a study of these world religions, if we have a theory of the relation between church and state that deals adequately with these, we have something of great value.

## **IV. Religious Liberty in the Context of the Defeasibility of Freedom Rights**

So far, my aim has been to argue that the notions of rights and of religion itself are not vague in a way that precludes the possibility of articulating a plausible account of the nature (though not the strength) of a human right to religious liberty. But there is a third concept needing attention here: that of freedom. It may be instructive to begin with John Stuart Mill's famous pronouncement in his *On Liberty*:

The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual in the way of compulsion and control. . .That principle is, that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. . .to prevent harm to others.15

This "harm principle" raises the question what constitutes self-protection. Presumably it is protection from harm, but that notion is contestable. I hope there can be wide agreement that the criteria for its application in legal cases should be secular, as, arguably, they are even for the notion as it figures in general ethics. (Mill would of course have defined harm in terms of causing pain or suffering or at least reducing pleasure in certain ways.)16 The appropriate scope of liberty has been extensively discussed, and here I will simply record sympathy with the idea, defended in *On Liberty* and a multitude of

16 It is noteworthy that Bernard Gert's widely known system of moral rules includes among the basic ones "Do not deprive of pleasure," which is the fifth of his system of ten. See *Common Morality* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 20. Gert argues plausibly, and in ways relevant here, for widespread agreement on such rules.

<sup>15</sup> John Stuart Mill, *On Liberty* (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978), 9–10. Mill is strongly opposed to parentalism and (for competent adults) excludes harm to oneself as a ground for interference. See esp. 10ff. The notion of harm is seriously vague, and both in connection with damaging the environment and in relation to such economic behavior as purchasing goods manufactured by sweatshop labor, questions have arisen regarding just how free we ought to be even if the harm principle is sound so far as it goes. Instructive recent studies of the scope of moral responsibility and, especially of the strength of the obligation not to harm in comparison with that of the obligation to render aid, see Garrett Cullity, *The Moral Demands of Affluence* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004) and Judith Lichtenberg, "Negative Duties, Positive Duties, and the 'New Harms'," *Ethics*, 120 (2010): 557–78.

later writings, that justification of restrictions of liberty must come from adequate evidence that non-restriction will be significantly harmful to persons—though I would add that harm to animals or the environment should also be taken to be a potentially adequate ground for restricting liberty.

If liberty rights are limited by a conception of what is required to prevent harm, and that conception is religiously neutral, it is natural to ask why religious freedom should be singled out, as it is in the United States and other countries, as special, at least in deserving emphasis in constitutions and in statements of human rights. In providing a partial answer to this question I want to restrict my attention to democratic societies and simply to assume that governments in morally sound democracies seek to protect the people and to do at least something toward their flourishing. I am conceiving democratic government as "of, by, and for the people." I have in mind a principle applicable to church and state alike:

*The principle of protection of identity*: the deeper a set of commitments is in a person, and the closer it comes to determining that person's sense of identity, the stronger the case for protecting the expression of those commitments.17

This principle is religiously neutral in content; but, as a matter of historical fact and perhaps of human psychology as well, religious commitments tend to be important for people in both ways: in depth and in determining the sense of identity. This is especially apparent where religious people satisfy all of the criteria described above for having a religion. Secular commitments can be comparably deep, in a sense implying that the persons in question cannot easily give them up and tend to protect them even at great cost to their well-being; this principle does not discriminate against those other commitments. But few if any non-religious kinds of commitment combine the depth and contribution to the sense of identity that go with many (though by no means all) religious commitments. I would not go so far as to say that restrictions of the free exercise of religion are necessarily a kind of harm, though in fact they may constitute or at least cause harm; but to those in whom religion is deep, they tend to be *felt* as such and as threats to one's sense of identity or at least to one's expression of it.

Earlier I suggested there is a human right to religious liberty. The main point of bringing the harm principle and the protection of identity principle into this paper is to indicate how religious liberty might be so conceived. The right to liberty, including free expression of various kinds, is implicit in the harm principle; and what the protection of identity principle shows is that religious liberty is (for most religious people) one kind of liberty having great importance for the sense of identity. Given its role in the sense of identity of many religious people, religious liberty may be, for them, relative to the subjective sense of well-being, *contingently basic*. If so, this provides a sense in which religion (though not necessarily only religion) is "special."18 But even apart from this point, the practice of religion is so widespread—and so visible and controversial—that, if only for pragmatic reasons, it is useful to single out a right

<sup>17</sup> Robert Audi, *Democratic Authority and the Separation of Church and State* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 42.

<sup>18</sup> This view contrasts with Zucca's comment that to the question whether religion is special "There is no answer" (this volume, ch. 21, 393).

to these rather than simply treat the relevant acts as protected (within the limits of a sound harm principle) as exercises of liberty. Indefeasibility is of course not entailed by the kind of importance I have suggested the right to religious liberty is to most people who reflect on it, including many who are religious. Among the defeaters of any right are conflicts with other rights, such as the right not to be harmed. If a religion calls for human sacrifice or even major kinds of mutilation of children, neither morality not a sound account of human rights will countenance such practices.19

## **V. The Limits of the Free Exercise of Religion**

If I have been right in thinking that some version of the harm principle is crucial for determining the proper legal scope of religious liberty, and also right in taking the protection of identity principle to be a constitutive standard for guiding policy, then from the point of view of political philosophy, religious liberty is only contingently special, however important it may be historically or for particular individuals or cultures. I do not see that Zucca need disagree with this conclusion. The difference between us may concern my greater optimism about clarifying the issues and my sense of the importance of protecting the sense of identity when threats to it come from restrictions of religious freedom.

I include under religious liberty the right to leave a religion (whether for secularity or another religion). I see nothing in Zucca's paper that would preclude his agreeing that given the coercive pressures this may generate in some religious groups, governments and international organizations should take pains to defend such liberties of departure. Indeed, a case might be made that the liberty of departure is as important a human right as the liberty of religious exercise.

Given the framework assumptions of this paper—in particular that our concern is democratic societies and, on the international scene, democratically structured institutions, whether governmental or not—it is appropriate to indicate how democratic societies may justifiedly limit religious freedom in ways that go beyond the ordinary kinds of protection that require, for instance, prohibiting human sacrifice and mutilation of children. In particular, I would argue that a sound democracy should separate church and state even if a majority of the population would prefer that it not do so. To be sure, if a large enough majority in a democracy wishes to have, say, an established church, then this will be instituted. But a constitutional democracy can at least require a supermajority for amendments, which might prevent any simple majority's establishing a church; and my point concerns what is constitutionally appropriate, roughly

<sup>19</sup> Genital mutilation of female children is an example (though where practiced it may be culturally rather than religiously endorsed); male circumcision is not in my view major mutilation, but it is being debated as a practice that autonomy rights might preclude, in the sense that the child's right (ultimately) to control what is done to its body outweighs the religious imperative to circumcise. A related matter is raised in a recent *New York Times* report describing controversy over the legal propriety of (in Hebrew) *metzitzah b'peh*, in which the officiant (the *mohel*) removes blood from the infant's wound by mouth. The case has pitted city health officials, who attribute spread of the herpes simplex virus and (since 2000) two infant deaths to the practice, against defenders of the practice as covered by a right to religious liberty.

in the sense of being (defeasibly) part of the basic legal structure of the governmental entity in question.

Why should democracies separate church and state, given that a country with an established church can respect religious liberty? So far, I have not mentioned basic political equality as, together with liberty, a constitutive normative requirement for a morally sound democracy. It is true that establishment is consistent with a very high level of civil liberty; but if I am not a member of the established church, one thing I am not free to do is compete for any official positions its members occupy in government. These may of course be minor; but plainly the established religion and its members will be privileged in a way that is inconsistent with equal treatment of citizens.

A related standard is governmental religious neutrality: not only should government not include an established church; it should also not give preference to the religious as such over the non-religious. Thus, such privileges as conscientious objector status should not be available only on religious grounds, as has been the case historically. Here some citizens' moral objections to killing may be as much a part of their sense of identity as other citizens' religious objections to it. The neutrality principle also applies to legal definitions, for instance of health care and indeed of religious freedom itself. The human right to religious liberty should not be keyed to a definition of religious liberty that is peculiar to any one religion. Here, as in other cases, the multiple-criterion conception of religion, applied within a reasonable theory of liberty rights in general, provides a good combination of latitude and determinacy.

#### **VI. Religious Freedom and the Status of Animals**

In discussing human rights we may easily forget that animals may have rights as well. To be sure, we can, as Kant did, make good sense of the notion of acting wrongly toward animals whether they have rights or not. I propose to leave open whether animals have rights. First, they clearly can suffer and can experience pleasure. We may thus speak of their *welfare* or their well-being or its opposite. Secondly, human beings can do wrongs toward animals, be morally responsible for them, and have attitudes toward them that are morally appropriate or inappropriate, and this need not depend on *any* rights being violated, whether of the animals or of anyone else. It is, for instance, prima facie morally wrong to cause a dog pain, especially if the pain is severe and extended, as with torture; and it is a prima facie morally good thing to cure a dog of a debilitating disease. Such deeds count toward good and bad character in the sense in which 'character' is a moral term. The language of virtue and vice also applies to treatment of dogs, horses, and many other kinds of animals.

The special relevance of this for our topic here is that some religions (or at least some sects within them), such as Judaism and Islam, call for animal sacrifice. To be sure, killing in itself need cause no pain, but in a good animal life it is at least a deprivation of pleasure.20 Suppose that a lamb is to be sacrificed by putting it directly on a hot fire. This is a kind of torture, and it seems reasonable to consider a governmental

<sup>20</sup> In Gert's moral theory, as noted earlier, deprivation of pleasure is a major category of ethical prohibition, and I see no reason not to apply it to the treatment of animals as well as human beings.

prohibition of it justified, even if it is religiously enjoined. To be sure, illegalization is one thing; the extent, say in length of sentence, and kind of punishment, for instance in imprisonment or fines, is another. Each society should discuss such matters, but I cannot see that causing animal suffering should be permissible simply by virtue of being required by an exercise of religious liberty. (Here matters of the degree of suffering and the importance of the religious liberty much be taken into account.) Whether the legal sanction is a fine rather than a more serious deprivation or punishment is a further matter.

A useful analogy here might be destruction of property. Preventing that may justify some restrictions of religious liberty. Now there are people who would rather lose a car or even a residence rather than allow the death of a pet—especially if it is by fire. This is surely reason to think that preventing animal suffering also justifies certain restrictions of religious liberty. Not only does this point not depend on any appeal to animals' rights; there is also no a priori principle to the effect that good ethics always gives priority to rights over principles in a case of conflict. If the would-be sacrificial animal has no rights, the principle that we ought not to subject animals to torture may still take priority over rights of free exercise of religion that would protect the torture. Here, as in other cases, we can see that moral obligation does not depend on its addressees or beneficiaries having a right which its non-fulfillment violates.

Part of the point of bringing up the moral status of animals is to indicate both the breadth, and the difficulty of fully understanding the scope, of the human right to religious liberty. Even if one takes religious expression to be close to the sense of identity of those who have internalized the relevant religion, it does not follow that all the actions that go with that expression should be legally protected against other interests or in violation of principles that may concern pain and pleasure and apply to beings capable of those but not assumed to have rights. This point is compatible with distinguishing, as Mill did, qualities of pleasure. A plausible theory of the differential value of pleasures—and indeed of pains—is quite consonant with taking very seriously the simple pains and pleasures of animals. Indeed, as different as we are from domestic animals in the far greater variety of our pleasures, in our most excruciating pains we seem to be very much like them. When this is taken together with the point that, other things equal, ethics gives greater weight to reducing or preventing pain than to enhancing or achieving pleasure, the problem of comparing rights of religious freedom and, related to this, property rights regarding animals, to what might be called the justified claims of animals becomes both clearer and more difficult.

On the account of rights suggested in this paper, it is plausible to conclude that there is a human right to religious liberty—indeed a double-barrelled right encompassing both exercise and departure: the practice of religion or the leaving of it. Conceived as moral, this human right may be considered a special case of a natural right to liberty. If human rights are, in the basic cases, the natural rights of human beings, then there is a human right to religious liberty if there is a natural right to liberty whose scope encompasses religious practice. If, however, human rights are a kind of internationally recognized status, then a right to religious liberty is a contingent and variable matter. I prefer the former, broadly moral-connectedness conception of human rights; but on either conception, liberty rights are defeasible. Zucca, I think, is free to work with either conception or, as he perhaps does, with one or the other depending on the demands of the context of discussion. In any case, if religious liberty seems to many political thinkers especially worth protecting, that may be not just because of historically memorable threats to it but also because it is deep in the sense of identity of many people. Just how far it goes however, and the extent to which governments should protect it, is a matter for both moral and political reflection and national and international policy.21

21 This paper has benefitted from comments by Massimo Renzo and from discussion with Lorenzo Zucca and the audience for presentation of an earlier version at King's College London.