---
title: "Why International Legal Human Rights?"
author:
  - name: "Allen Buchanan"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "244–262"
citation_key: "buchanan2015international"
---

## <span id="page-258-0"></span>Why *[International Legal](#page-7-17)* Human Rights?

#### *Allen Buchanan*

### **I. A Neglected But Fundamental Question**

Recent philosophical theorizing about human rights is burgeoning. There is one glaring lacuna, however. Philosophers have not identified, much less addressed, one of the most fundamental questions a philosophical theory of human rights must answer: What justification, if any, is there for having a system of *international legal* human rights? Because the system of international legal rights is central to contemporary human rights practice, one must answer that question to know whether the practice is justified. Instead, the focus has been on three different questions: (1) how is the concept of human rights to be analyzed, (2) how are statements about the existence of moral human rights to be justified, and (3) how can moral philosophy be enlisted to criticize or help justify various particular international legal human rights?1

Question (1) is poorly framed because it assumes, without warrant, that there is one concept of human rights. Instead, it can be argued that there are at least two: the concept of human rights as general moral rights of all human individuals, regardless of whether they are recognized in positive law, whether domestic or international; and the concept of international legal human rights.2 The former concept was evident in

1 On question (1) Beitz and others who espouse what is sometimes called a Political (or Practical) view hold that the key to understanding the concept of human rights is to see how claims about human rights function in international human rights practice. They conclude it is part of the concept of human rights that if these rights are violated by a state, then other states have a pro tanto reason to take action against the violator (Beitz) or that violations disable what would otherwise be an appropriate reply by the state to criticism, namely, "it is none of your business" (Raz). On the Political View, the concept of human rights presupposes the state system, or, to put the same point differently, it is part of the concept of a human right that these rights may be asserted against states. Tasioulas rejects the Political View, arguing that the concept of human rights would be applicable in a condition of global anarchy or where a world government existed. To my mind this dispute is a case of ships passing in the night. Political View theorists like Beitz and Raz should simply admit that they are talking about an important feature of the concept of human rights that is central to international human rights practice and acknowledge that the term "human rights" is sometimes used differently, to refer to rights of all humans by virtue of their humanity and in ways that do not presuppose the existence of the state system. (For example, the term was often used this way by abolitionists and feminists in the nineteenth century, before there was serious consideration of states invoking human rights to criticize the behavior of other states). And Tasioulas should simply acknowledge that there is more than one valid use of the term "human rights" and that in international human rights practice it is often used in ways that are captured by the Political View. In international human rights law and practice the term "human rights" sometimes refers to international legal human rights and sometimes to rights that should be incorporated into international human rights law, as in deliberations leading to the creation of new human rights treaties.

2 Samantha Besson notes that recent philosophical theorizing about human rights has often neglected the centrality of law in human rights practice. "The Human Right to Democracy: A Moral Defense, with a Legal Nuance," in *Souverainete populaire et droits de l'homme, Collection Science et Technique de la* 

#### *Allen Buchanan* 245

natural rights thinking in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, where it was used to describe the boundaries of state sovereignty and to formulate doctrines of justified revolution; and by the nineteenth century it was deployed conspicuously in the abolitionist and early feminist movements. The latter concept came to prominence with the founding of the modern human rights system at the end of the Second World War and introduced an international legal element that was lacking in the earlier concept. The distinctive idea of the modern human rights enterprise was to create standards, in international law, for how all states are to treat those under their jurisdiction. These international legal standards for states were formulated prominently, though not exclusively, in terms of individual legal rights.

Whether there is one concept of human rights or two is of limited significance. The more interesting question is this: What is the relationship between moral human rights and international legal human rights? A number of theorists assume, rather than argue for, an answer to this question, namely, what I shall call the Mirroring View. According to the Mirroring View, justifying particular international legal human rights (ILHRs) requires showing how they realize corresponding, pre-existing, moral human rights (MHRs).3 In other words, even when they do not explicitly address the question of how to justify the system of international legal human rights, some philosophers simply assume that to justify it one must first develop a satisfactory theory of moral human rights, because they implicitly subscribe to the Mirroring View.

With respect to question (3), there is a widespread sense that international legal human rights suffer inflation and that proper constraint could be supplied by a sound philosophical theory (the favorite example of supposed inflation being the right to periodic holidays with pay). This makes good sense if one holds the Mirroring View. If international legal human rights are justified by showing how they help realize corresponding, pre-existing moral human rights, then we first need to know what moral human rights there are, in order to know which rights should be included in a system of international legal human rights. And this is true even if not all moral rights are suitable for international legalization. On this view, if there is no moral human right to periodic holidays with pay, then there should be no international legal human right of that description.

Although these three questions are all important, answering them would not answer a different, quite fundamental question: What reasons are there for having a system of ILHRs and are those reasons sufficient? Call this the General Justification Question regarding international legal human rights. Notice that it is different from—and prior to—the question of whether any particular right ought to be included in a system of

*Societe* (Strasbourg: Editions du Conseil de l'Europe 2010), 6–7. Available at http://www.venice.coe.int/ docs/2010/CDL-UD%29003-e.pdf).

<sup>3</sup> Allen Buchanan, "Human Rights," in David Estlund (ed.), *Oxford Handbook of Political Philosophy* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012). Theorists who proceed as if they hold the Mirroring View include James Griffin, Christopher Wellman, Carl Wellman, Andrew Altman, David Miller, and Joseph Raz. Rawls explicitly rejects the Mirroring View. Beitz can be interpreted as doing so as well, though he may not, because he mainly concerns himself with the concept of human rights and has relatively little to say about the justification of international legal human rights.

ILHRs ((3) noted earlier). The latter question assumes that having a system of ILHRs is justified and then asks whether this or that right should be included in it.

## **II. Legal Rights Without Corresponding Moral Rights**

Those who assume the Mirroring View fail to consider the possibility that international legal human rights, like many rights in domestic legal systems, can be justifiable even in the absence of a corresponding moral right. For example, there are a number of different moral grounds for having a legal right to health care and the goal of giving legal effect to a moral right to health care is only one of them. Without appealing to a corresponding moral right, the legal right to health care can be justified on the grounds that it prevents great social disutility that would otherwise result from treatable or preventable diseases, that it promotes social solidarity, that it contributes to economic prosperity, and that it is an important ingredient of a decent society. So, it is a mistake to assume that legal rights, if they are justified, must be justified by reference to corresponding moral rights. It is better to focus on the basic idea of the modern human rights movement—the project of creating international legal standards for how states are to treat those under their jurisdiction—to note that these standards are largely, though not exclusively formulated in terms of international legal rights, and then, with an open mind, ask what different sorts of moral justifications might be given for having such a system.

This simple point that justified legal rights do not presuppose corresponding moral rights bears emphasis, because it shows that it is unwarranted to assume that ILHRs are just the embodiment in international law of MHRs and that consequently any international legal right (such as the right to periodic holidays with pay) that does not have a moral counterpart is unjustifiable. From this it follows that a standard form of argument among philosophers working on human rights is wrong-headed: One cannot infer from the fact (or, rather, intuition) that there is no MHR to X, that the inclusion of X in ILHR documents is a case of inflation.4

It also shows to be groundless the assumption that a philosophical account of the system of international legal rights is by and large a matter of producing a theory of moral human rights and then leaving the supposedly much less interesting and less philosophical question of their proper implementation to lawyers. Even if they do not explicitly make this last assumption, a number of philosophical theorists of human rights proceed as if they do, because they devote their energies exclusively to producing a moral theory of human rights, ignoring the yawning gap between claims about MHRs and claims about the justification for having a system of ILHRS.

The General Justification Question is also distinguishable not only from the question of whether any particular right should be included in the system of ILHRS, but also from another question: If the answer to the General Justification Question is affirmative, is the *existing* system of international legal human rights justifiable? Call this the Special Justification Question. There might be a justification for having

<sup>4</sup> Griffin makes this mistake. James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 191–211.

a system of ILHRS, but the system we have might lack some of the features that figure prominently in that justification. Oddly, when philosophers have gotten beyond the stage of analyzing "the" concept of human rights, they have generally only tried to determine whether or not some particular right is a plausible candidate for inclusion in a system of international legal human rights, without first answering either the General or the Special Justification Questions.

#### **III. The Relevance of History**

Beitz offers an explanation of the moral thinking that motivated the creation of the international human rights practice (henceforth, the Practice). Since the system of international legal human rights is central to the Practice, we may read him as offering an explanation of what motivated the creation of that system. Showing the incompleteness of his explanation can point us toward an answer to the General Justification Question.

Beitz says that in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War and the Holocaust there was a widespread conviction of the need for a new set of internationally recognized protections for individuals against harms inflicted by their own states.5 This characterization does not explain why the chosen remedy took the form of a set of *individual rights*, much less a set of *international legal* individual rights. There were in fact several alternatives for devising constraints on state power to protect individuals, including: (1) a list of duties of states (without correlative rights), (2) a list of group rights (given that the Holocaust and other major atrocities during the war were perpetrated against individuals *qua* members of groups), or (3) a modification of international law that lowered the barriers against interference in what states do within their borders, thus allowing third parties to aid victims in their efforts to protect themselves from the state. Simply saying that the Practice arose in response to a perceived threat posed by states to individuals is clearly insufficient, then, to explain the fact that individual rights are central to the Practice. Nor does it explain why the founders of the Practice agreed that the response to the problem of vulnerability should rely heavily on international law, rather than on other means of implementation.

Elsewhere I have sketched a more adequate explanation of what motivated the founding of the Practice.6 The basic idea is that the problem to which the creation of the Practice was a response was characterized by the founders much more specifically than Beitz suggests. The point was not just that individuals were vulnerable to harm inflicted by their states. Instead, it was widely assumed that the most serious threat of harm, as evidenced by the massive destruction recently witnessed, was in significant part the result of two distinct features characteristic of fascist/militarist ideology: *radical status inegalitarianism*, the denial that all those usually regarded as human have equal basic moral worth; and *radical collectivism*, the view that the individual is of no significant moral worth on his own account, but rather derives whatever value he has by virtue of his usefulness to or membership in the nation. This more fine-grained diagnosis of the problem points in the direction of a particular solution to it: Developing

<sup>5</sup> Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 129.

<sup>6</sup> Buchanan, "Human Rights".

a new body of international law that gives equal legal standing to individuals does something to protect them against the threat that their own state will relegate them a status of inferiority and signals that they are objects of international concern in their own right, independently of how their own states may value them.

Focusing only on the problem of making individuals less vulnerable to abuses or harms inflicted by their states overlooks the fact that from the beginning, in the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the founders assumed, in effect, that every state should perform the basic functions of the modern welfare state. So-called positive or welfare rights, not just protections against state-inflicted harms or abuses of government powers, were included from the outset, in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), which was understood to be a precursor to legally binding documents. So, a more accurate characterization of the project is to say that it was the attempt to use international law to set universal standards for how states are to treat those under their jurisdiction, where this encompasses (1) protections against state-inflicted harms or abuses of government power, (2) the affirmation of basic equal status for all, and (3) securing for all the conditions for a decent or minimally good human life, or, alternatively, ensuring that every state performs basic welfare state functions. Most if not all of the rights included in the UDHR and the various human rights treaties that followed it can be seen as performing one or more of these three functions.

## **IV. Did the Founders of the ILHR System Assume the Mirroring View?**

The opening passage of the UN Charter, which preceded the UDHR "...affirms faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person..." The UDHR's preamble appeals to "the inherent dignity and...equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family," states that "human rights should be protected by law," and asserts that "[a]ll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights."7 These are clearly references to moral, not legal rights. The preambles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) replicate this language almost verbatim. The most straightforward interpretation of this phrasing is that the project of that the UDHR begins is to establish a global practice that realizes, through international law, moral rights of all human individuals that exist independently of that practice itself or any other practice.8

<sup>7</sup> <http://www.un.org/en/documents/>.

<sup>8</sup> The preamble also includes the idea that respect for human rights is needed for international security, but it is the idea that human rights are grounded in the inherent dignity or equal worth of the human person that distinguishes the Charter, the UDHR, and the Covenants from traditional international legal discourse, marking the beginning of the modern human rights era. The language of inherent dignity or equal moral worth is also found in the Racism Convention, the Migrants Convention, the Vienna Declaration, the Children's Convention, and the Torture Convention. For a meticulous documentation of the claim that the Practice was founded on the idea of moral rights that all human individuals have equally and on their own account, drawing on the language of the UDHR, the records of the preparatory work of the Human Rights Commission that drafted the UDHR, and the records of the debates on the UDHR in the UN General Assembly, see Johannes Morsink, *The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Intent, and Drafting* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999) and Johannes Morsink, *Inherent Human Rights* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009).

This is completely compatible, of course, with the Mirroring View being false. It might turn out instead that, contrary to what the founders thought, the *best* justification for having a system of international legal rights is not that they help realize a set of corresponding moral human rights, either because there are no moral human rights (as Bentham thought) or because other moral considerations in favor of having such a system suffice. Moreover, providing a non-MRH-based justification for ILHRs might be advantageous, if, as some have argued, there are some valid or credible moralities that do not recognize individual moral rights, or moral rights of any kind. A justification for the system of ILHRs that did not rely on the assumption that there are individual moral rights might in that sense be more "exportable," that is, might enjoy wider cross-cultural support.

The possibility that the best justification of the ILHR system would not proceed on the basis of the Mirroring View ought not to be dismissed out of hand, because, as I have already noted, in many cases legal individual rights can be adequately justified by a combination of moral reasons, without showing that they are needed to realize a corresponding moral right. One option worth considering is that even if some ILHRs are best justified by reference to corresponding moral rights, some are justified by other considerations.

## **V. Reasons for Having a System of International Legal Human Rights**

In this section, I outline three distinct justifications for having an international legal system similar to the existing one. Argument One appeals to the benefits that such a system provides. Argument Two justifies the system of international legal human rights by showing that it mitigates a serious flaw of the international legal order that renders it unjustifiable, unless modified: the fact that it confers sovereign powers on states that create great risks for those under their jurisdiction. Argument Three shows that states, and the governments that act as their agents, have a special obligation to support an international legal human rights system because they are the chief beneficiaries of an international order that would be morally unjustifiable without it.

A justification for having a system of international legal human rights must be two-pronged, addressing both the fact that the rights that compose such a system are *international legal* rights and the fact that they are rights *of individuals*. Theorists who situate themselves in the broadly liberal tradition find it obvious that, within the state, legal individual rights can provide valuable protections against abuses of state power and would agree that they are especially valuable for shielding individuals from harms inflicted in the name of ideologies of radical status inegalitarianism and radical collectivism. But more needs to be said about why there is a need for a system of *international* legal individual rights.

*A substantial part of the answer lies in an appreciation of both the success and the limitations of domestic constitutionalization of individual rights.* At the time of the founding of the Practice, there were a number of examples where domestic bills of rights appeared to be playing a significant role in protecting the equal dignity of individuals. It is unsurprising, then, that in preparing the first draft of the UDHR, existing domestic bills of rights were surveyed, and that the original Human Rights Commission's members characterized their task as the formulation of an international bill of rights.9

If domestic bills of rights were so valuable, why was it thought necessary to formulate an international bill of rights? Instead, why not simply mobilize diplomatic, political, and economic pressure, under the leadership of powerful states that appreciate the importance of constitutional individual rights, to encourage states that lack such protections to remedy this defect?

#### **Argument 1: The benefits of having an ILHR system**

There are a number of reasons to opt instead for a system of international legal human rights, corresponding to different valuable functions that such a system can perform. These fall under the seven headings below.

#### *(1)╇ Encouraging and supplementing domestic constitutional bills of rights*

Promulgating a list of international legal rights, with corresponding legal obligations on the part of states, especially if it is supported by the authority of the UN—arguably the only international institution with credible pretensions to genuine inclusiveness and global moral standing—could both encourage those societies lacking domestic bills of rights to create them and provide a model for them to emulate. There is evidence that this has indeed occurred, especially in the cases of peoples emerging from colonial domination and former socialist states undergoing liberal democratization.10 In the case of societies that have incomplete or otherwise defective domestic constitutional rights regimes, a well-crafted international list of rights can encourage improvements. To the extent that the domestic constitutionalization of individual rights is a progressive development, the fact that a system of international legal human rights can assist it counts in favor of having it.

There are other ways in which states might be encouraged to adopt or improve constitutional rights systems, for example, through international declarations or goal-setting exercises that lack the force of international law. The mechanism of international law has two advantages. First, and most obviously, it makes it clear that states have legal obligations to promote certain rights within their jurisdictions, not just that it would be a good thing if they did, while at the same time providing an authoritative initial formulation of what these rights are and, perhaps more importantly, processes for interpreting these obligations that conform to principles of legal reasoning. So far as states give more weight to international legal obligations than to less formal undertakings, the system of international legal human rights is likely to be more effective than non-legal alternatives. Second, when states incur international legal obligations,

<sup>9</sup> Mary Ann Glendon, *A World Made New* (New York: Random House, 2001), 56–83; Morsink, *Inherent Human Rights*, 149.

<sup>10</sup> Nancy Flowers (ed.), *Human Rights Here and Now: Celebrating the Universal Declaration of Human Rights* (University of Minnesota Human Rights Center). Available at http://[http://www.1.umn.edu/](http://www.1.umn.edu/humanrits/edumat/hreduseries/short-history.htum) [humanrits/edumat/hreduseries/short-history.htum](http://www.1.umn.edu/humanrits/edumat/hreduseries/short-history.htum).

this creates the possibility of eventually developing legal institutions that will hold states accountable for fulfilling them.

#### *(2)╇ Providing back-up for failures of domestic protection of rights*

Even in societies that have comprehensive constitutional individual rights, there can be failures of implementation which a system of international legal rights can help prevent or ameliorate. Societies that generally do a good job of protecting the rights of their citizens sometimes fall short in the case of particular groups—women, racial or ethnic minorities, or gays, lesbians, or transgender people. And in cases of perceived national emergency, as in war or in the wake of dramatic terrorist activity, the rights of all citizens may be imperiled by state action, in the name of national security. In some cases, domestic courts appeal to international legal human rights to justify decisions to prevent or remedy both kinds of failures.11 The fact that international legal human rights are law, not simply a statement of supposed moral rights, empowers domestic courts to invoke it to correct for lapses in the state's protection of rights.

Even though there may be some differences in domestic and international lists of rights, there is sufficient overlap to make the back-up function significant. That there should be considerable overlap is not surprising, given the fact, noted earlier, that the drafters of the UDHR looked to influential domestic bills of rights for guidance and given that the UDHR and the ICCPR have subsequently influenced the content of many domestic bills of rights.

A system of international legal rights can perform the back-up function even if (i) there are no *international* institutions for enforcement of international legal human rights and (ii) even in cases where no significant *external* pressures can be brought to bear on states when they fall short in implementing their own domestic constitutional rights. With respect to (i), it must be emphasized that most legal enforcement of international legal human rights is not achieved through the actions of international institutions but through the operations of domestic institutions.12 In states where the judiciary is relatively independent and there is a culture of compliance with its determinations, a court's ruling that the state violates a citizen's international legal human right can result in the state taking corrective action, even in the absence of any possibility of enforcement from outside the state. With respect to (ii), there is impressive evidence that some states respond to pressures from *domestic* groups mobilized under the banner of international legal human rights.13 So, neither international institutions

<sup>11</sup> See, eg, *Dudgeon v. United Kingdom*, 4 Eur. Ct. H.R. 149 (1981), which held that Irish law criminalizing "buggery" between consenting adults violated the right to privacy under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), and UN Human Rights Committee judgment against similar laws in Tasmania (*Toonen v. Australia*, Case No. 488/1992, U.N. Hum. Rts. Comm., 15th Sess., U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/50/D/488/1992 (1994)). For other examples, see Robert O. Keohane, Stephen Macedo, and Andrew Moravcsik, "Democracy-Enhancing Multilateralism," Institute for International Law and Justice Working Paper No. 2007/4 (New York University Law School, 2007).

<sup>12</sup> Henry J. Steiner, Philip Alston, and Ryan Goodman, *International Human Rights in Context: Law, Politics, Morals*, 3rd edn. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), vii, 1087–222).

<sup>13</sup> Beth A. Simmons, *Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law and Domestic Politics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 112–54.

capable of enforcement nor effective external pressure appear to be necessary for a system of international legal human rights to perform the function of providing back-up for failures in the implementation of domestic constitutional rights.

#### *(3)╇ Enhancing the legitimacy of the state*

An institution is legitimate in the normative sense if it has the right to rule (that is, has rightful authority); it is legitimate in the sociological sense if it is widely *believed* to have the right to rule. Sociological legitimacy is normatively important, to the extent that an institution's ability to perform its functions depends on whether it is perceived to exercise rightful authority.

When a system of international legal human rights performs the back-up function just described, it can contribute to the state's legitimacy in the normative sense, given the plausible assumption that the legitimacy of the state depends in part on its at least providing minimally adequate protection of its citizens' human rights. But a system of international legal human rights can also contribute to legitimacy in the sociological sense. If citizens know that when it comes to legal claims they make against their state, the state is not the final arbiter in its own case, this can bolster the belief that the state is legitimate.14 Thus the public's knowledge that the system of international legal human rights is performing the back-up function can enhance sociological legitimacy. So, to the extent that it is important not only whether the state has the right to rule, but also whether it is recognized to have the right to rule, there is value in having a system of ILHRs.

#### *(4)╇ Contributing to better understandings of domestic constitutional rights*

It is a perennial complaint in some quarters that international legal human rights betray a parochial scheme of values and, more specifically, that they are infected by the particular cultural biases of "Western" societies, who are said to have played a disproportionate role in formulating them. Interestingly, those who voice this complaint seem to be unconcerned about the risk of cultural biases in domestic bills of rights. The most influential domestic bills of rights—those that have been most widely imitated in constitutions across a diversity of societies—are the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen and the US Bill of Rights. Both of these documents and many of their numerous offspring present the rights they enumerate as *universal rights*, not rights peculiar to people in a particular society. Given that this is so, the question arises as to whether in some cases domestic bills of rights fail to deliver on the promise of universality, and instead exhibit a parochial bias due to the particular historical–cultural context in which they originated.

The existence of a system of international legal human rights can help ensure that domestic bills of rights are not distorted by parochialism if two conditions are satisfied: First, the system exerts significant influence on the original formulation or

<sup>14</sup> Stephen Gardbaum, "Human Rights as International Constitutional Rights," *The European Journal of International Law*, 19(4) (2008): 762–5. See also Besson, "The Human Right to Democracy."

subsequent interpretation of the items included in domestic bills of rights, at least in a non-trivial proportion of cases; and second, the system includes effective measures to reduce the risk of parochialism.

I have already indicated that the first condition is satisfied with respect to the existing system of international legal human rights: The UDHR and the ICCPR in particular have influenced the creation of domestic bills of rights in a number of states and, at least in states whose courts recognize the supremacy of international human rights law or look to it as a legitimate interpretative source, international legal human rights influence the interpretation of domestic constitutional rights.

With regard to the second condition, there is abundant evidence that both in its origins and its subsequent development the existing international legal human rights system includes impressive provisions for reducing the risk of parochialism in how human rights are conceived. The strenuous efforts of the drafters of the UDHR to include a wide range of cultural perspectives have been well-documented.15 Further, there is clear evidence that anti-colonialist (and hence "non-Western") views were not only voiced in the deliberations that led to the drafting but also found their way into the final document, in particular with respect to the unambiguous assertion that the rights therein contained apply to all persons, including those currently under colonial domination16 and the enunciation of a right of self-determination of *all* peoples.

It would be a mistake, however, to assume that whether the existing system of international legal human rights includes protections against parochialism depends solely or even chiefly on whether such measures informed the drafting of the founding documents. What matters is whether the system subsequently developed institutions and principles that provide creditable protections against parochialism in the ongoing interpretation and re-interpretation of international legal human rights and in particular in the processes by which new human rights conventions are created.17

This is precisely what has occurred. The treaty bodies that were established to monitor compliance with the conventions that followed the UDHR were explicitly designed to incorporate diverse points of view and, as the membership of the UN quadrupled through the inclusion of newly liberated colonies, the risks of Western-dominated, parochial understandings of international legal human rights diminished accordingly.

I am not suggesting that the existing understanding of international legal human rights is free of parochial bias.18 Instead, I am making two more modest points. First, the existing international legal human rights system is institutionally designed to reduce the risk of parochialism. Second, regardless of whether the existing system does a good job of reducing the risk of parochialism, a legal order for the protection of individual rights that is created and developed through the participation of people

16 UDHR, Article 2 states that "Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration [and that]. . .no distinction shall be made n the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, or non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty."

17 Allen Buchanan,"Human Rights and the International Legal Order," *Legal Theory*, 14(1) (2008): 39–70.

18 For an in-depth assessment of the frequently voiced complaint that the international legal human rights system is biased against collectivistic moralities, see Allen Buchanan, *The Heart of Human Rights* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), ch. 7, "The Ethical Pluralist Challenge to Human Rights."

<sup>15</sup> Glendon, *A World Made New*, 56–83.

from many cultures should be less prone to parochialism in its understanding of those rights, other things being equal, than one that operates solely within a domestic cultural context. An international legal regime of rights that are explicitly and unambiguously conceived as universal, rather than local, and that includes institutional measures to reduce the risk of parochialism, can provide a corrective for parochial understandings of those individual rights that are intended to be universal in domestic constitutions.

#### *(5)╇ Supplying resources for improving international humanitarian law*

To a significant degree, international human rights law and international humanitarian law (IHL) have distinct origins and, until very recently, have developed independently from one another. IHL originated in an international order that did not yet view individuals as subjects of international law and that was not yet transformed by the momentous advent of the post-Second World War human rights regime. Hence it is not surprising that IHL has not been framed in the language of individual rights.

To the extent that the statist origins of IHL still influence its content and institutional development, reconceptualizing it in the light of international human rights law would not only help to correct for any statist biases, but also could strengthen its implementation by harnessing it to the resources of the larger human rights movement. The point is not that traditional IHL did not take the well-being of individuals into account at all, but rather that subsuming IHL under the system of international legal human rights would unambiguously convey the message that the most important aim of constraining the conduct of war is to protect individuals, not to benefit states. It would also make absolutely clear that the constraints on war are not conditional on reciprocity in their observance, but are instead grounded in proper regard for all human individuals.

There is evidence that the influence of the existing international legal human rights system has already begun to stimulate progressive developments in IHL, without anything as radical as a merger of the two types of law. For example, the concept of war crimes has recently been expanded to include mass rapes. Rape was recognized as a violation of international legal human rights long before it was seen to fall within the scope of war crimes. Moreover, the effective use of ILHRs discourse by international human rights non-governmental organizations appears to have played a major role in this change. It can also be argued that the 1977 Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions strengthen the Conventions by including human rights provisions not previously found in them.19 Finally, James Nickel has suggested that international legal human rights law has had another, arguably progressive influence on IHL: Conceptualizing the traditional IHL protections as human rights increases their weight in international legal reasoning, making them more resistant to certain trade-offs.20 These developments have been succinctly summarized by Robert

<sup>19</sup> Frits Kalshoven and Lisabeth Zegveld, *Constraints on Waging War: An Introduction to International Humanitarian Law*, 3rd edn. (Geneva: ICRC, 2001), 34.

<sup>20</sup> James Nickel, personal communication, 16 June 2011.

Sloane as follows: 21 "[Modern] IHL signifies a major postwar shift . . . away from an interstate model grounded solely in simple reciprocity and interstate dynamics and toward a model justified more explicitly by international human rights law's solicitude for the individual and normative commitment to a universal conception of human dignity."

#### *(6) Constituting an individual-centered legal framework for coping with genuinely global problems*

As we have seen, the value of having a system of ILHRs depends in large part on whether there are deficiencies in domestic law that such a system can ameliorate. There are two kinds of threats to human welfare that present serious problems for even the more enlightened domestic legal systems. The first is the vulnerability of stateless persons. Domestic constitutions ascribe rights chiefly to citizens. When rights are ascribed to non-citizens, they apply only to those non-citizens within the state's territory. Not surprisingly, domestic constitutions do not affirm rights for stateless persons elsewhere.22 International legal human rights are ascribed to all individuals, including those who are stateless, irrespective of where they are.

The second problem that domestic rights regimes have difficulty addressing is harms that states individually cannot effectively cope with and for which it would be inappropriate to hold them responsible, in the absence of any voluntarily assumed special international legal obligation. These include harms to health and well-being caused by environmental pollution, but also damage caused by international terrorists or pirates on the high seas. To cope with this second category of threats, states not only need to cooperate, but also to coordinate their cooperation on a single set of legal standards. Framing the standards in terms of international legal human rights not only gives them greater legal weight, but also enlists the impressive political and legal resources of the international human rights movement. Thus, for example, if the more severe harms that may occur as a result of global climate change are conceived as violations of international legal human rights to an adequate standard of living or to health or even to physical security in extreme cases, the efficacy of mobilization to prevent them may be increased.

Both in the case of stateless persons and that of global environmental threats, voluntary solutions may be blocked by the free-rider problem, because averting the threat has the characteristics of a public good. To the extent that obligations under international human rights law are treated as among the most weighty international legal obligations rather than just matters of morally admirable policy or bureaucratic requirements, conceiving of these threats as violations of international legal human rights can help counteract the incentives for free-riding.

<sup>21</sup> Robert Sloane, "Prologue to a Voluntarist War Convention," *Michigan Law Review*, 106(443) (2007–08): 483.

<sup>22</sup> Gardbaum, "Human Rights as International Constitutional Rights," 764–5.

#### *(7)╇ Helping to correct an inherent flaw of democracy*

It is a virtue of democracy that government officials are accountable to their fellow citizens. That is the good news. The bad news is that the democratic commitment to the accountability of government to citizens tends to produce not just accountability, but near exclusive accountability. Democratic electoral processes and constitutional checks and balances create formidable obstacles to government taking into due account the legitimate interests of anyone who is not a citizen. In other words, democracy has an inherent structural bias toward excessive partiality or, if you will, against cosmopolitanism.23 This bias is most evident in the case of accountability through periodic elections: Foreigners have no votes.

A system of international legal human rights can provide resources for domestic and transnational groups to exert pressure for domestic government officials to take the rights of foreigners into account and to that extent curtail the structural bias of democracy. From the standpoint of institutional design, a commitment to international legal human rights can be seen as a self-binding mechanism for democratic peoples to help counteract this structural bias of their own constitutional structure. Even those democratic states (if there are any) whose implementation of individual rights for their own citizens is so perfect as to render the back-up function of international legal human rights otiose would still have this reason for supporting a system of international legal human rights.

#### **Argument 2: International legal human rights as a necessary condition for the justifiability of the international order**

The traditional, pre-human rights era international legal order conferred impressive—and extremely dangerous—rights and powers on states while at the same time imposing scandalously minimal requirements for statehood or, rather, for what qualifies a group to count as the government representing a state. The international order is often described as "the state system," and until the advent of the modern human rights movement, its norms governed the relationships between states and international law did not even recognize individuals as having rights on their own account. Generally speaking, the international order, at least in its legal structure, treated individuals as if they were of consequence only so far as their well-being affected the interest of states.24

The rights of sovereign states conferred by the traditional international order—or perhaps more accurately, the rights that constituted that order—included first and foremost an extremely robust right against interference in the "domestic affairs" of states. Operating behind the "veil of sovereignty," states had great latitude as to how they treated those under their jurisdiction.

<sup>23</sup> Note that this point does not assume an extreme cosmopolitan point of view. It only assumes that states should systematically give some independent weight to the well-being and freedom of foreigners, not that they should be given equal consideration.

<sup>24</sup> The humanitarian law of war, which began to develop prior to the modern human rights movement, is an exception to this generalization.

The extremely robust right against interference in a state's "domestic affairs," taken by itself, contributed significantly to the vulnerability of individuals to abusive behavior by their own states. It erected a formidable obstacle to efforts by oppressed people to enlist the help of external agents in combating tyranny. But there were several other norms of the international order that exacerbated the problem of vulnerability. Among the most important are the resource control norm, the borrowing privilege, and the right to limit or completely prohibit immigration.

According to the resource control norm, any government that the rules of the international order recognizes as legitimate has a right to dispose of the natural resources within the state's territory. As Thomas Pogge has pointed out, this norm gives governments virtually blank checks to sell or lease the country's natural resources to the highest bidder, without regard for the well-being of the general population.25 In brief, the resource control norm confers awesome power over resources without any checks to ensure responsible stewardship.

The borrowing privilege, whose destructive effects are also emphasized by Pogge, empowers states (or, in practice, the governments of states) to borrow, again without any restrictions. The effect of this norm is not only to lessen the incentives for governments to make the country self-reliant in financial matters, but, much worse, it enables irresponsible, inept, or corrupt governments to burden their populations with debts that can extend over generations and pose a formidable obstacle to economic development and the efforts of individuals to improve their lot in life. As with the resource control norm, a formidable power is conferred without provisions to prevent it from being exercised in deleterious ways, in conditions under which it is virtually guaranteed that abuses will occur.

Under the traditional international legal order, states also have a virtually absolute right to prevent foreigners from settling in or even entering their territories, as well as the right to withhold from them the rights usually accorded to citizens. This norm greatly compounds the damaging effects of the preceding three norms, because it makes the option of exit impractical for those whom other states are unwilling to accept. When governments persecute some people within their jurisdiction or abuse all of them, or when they squander resources or pile up mountains of debilitating debts, those who suffer from these actions may find no other country willing to accept them. By weakening the credibility of the threat of exit, the norm that confers the power to prohibit immigration deprives the oppressed of what might otherwise be an effective means of resisting tyranny or at least escaping it.

I have characterized these four norms of the traditional international order as conferring powers, privileges, and immunities on states, but in describing their effects the focus has been on the behavior of governments. This is not a mistake or an equivocation. Although the most basic norms of the international order are formulated in terms of states, they are applied to the behavior of governments, on the assumption that they are the agents through which the state acts. The destructive potential of the four norms of sovereignty noted earlier is exacerbated by a fifth norm, the Principle of

<sup>25</sup> Thomas Pogge, *World Poverty and Human Rights* (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2008).

Effectivity, which determines who counts as the government of a state. According to this principle, all that is required for a group of people to qualify as the government of state is that it exercise effective control over a territory with a relatively stable population and be capable of entering into relationships with other states.26

The Principle of Effectivity imposes no normative criteria whatsoever on what counts as a legitimate government. It is simply an instance of the more general principle that might makes right. In a world in which coming to be recognized as the legitimate government of a state means gaining all the powers, rights, privileges, and immunities that accrue to states, especially the right to control resources and the borrowing privilege, the Principle of Effectivity creates strong incentives for groups to gain control over a territory, by any means available to them, including the killing of rivals and the overthrow of existing governments.

There is one final feature of the international order that contributes to the vulnerability of many people: the fact that it is, to a significant degree, crafted—and often selectively implemented—to further the interests of the most powerful states. The most powerful states play a disproportionate role in determining what is customary international law, because their behavior counts more heavily in evaluating whether the requirement of "state practice" is met in the identification of an emerging customary norm. Likewise, the most powerful states are better able to shape treaty law, either by exerting pressure on weaker states to ratify treaties they favor, or by refraining from ratifying treaties they dislike and thereby limiting their effect. In our world, where the interests of states and global corporations are often aligned—and often at odds with the interests of ordinary people and especially the world's worst off—the disproportionate ability of powerful states to shape the international order, especially in its economic and financial institutions, can be highly destructive.

Taken together, these five flaws are so severe as to make the system morally unjustifable, unless they can be significantly mitigated. This conclusion requires a qualification: It holds on condition that a modification of the system that mitigated these flaws is feasible. The system of ILHRs has the potential to correct for all of these flaws of the international legal order, with the exception of the last one, or so I shall argue. And the qualifying condition holds: A system of ILHRs already exists, seems to be relatively stable, and does appear to mitigate some of the flaws to some extent.

At least in the case of the first flaw, the virtually unlimited license for states to abuse those under their jurisdiction, the potential has been actualized to some extent. International human rights law has served as the authoritative *lingua franca* for imposing standards on states as to how they may treat those under their jurisdiction, and the institutions of the international legal human rights system have provided an important resource for various parties who strive to hold states to those standards.

Here it is important avoid a common mistake, that of gauging the power of international human rights law by the strength of international institutions. As Beth Simmons, Kathryn Sikkink, and others have documented, most of the enforcement of international human rights occurs through domestic institutions (chiefly courts

<sup>26</sup> General Act of the 1885 Conference of Berlin available at [http://courses.wcupa.edu/jones/his312/](http://courses.wcupa.edu/jones/his312/misc/berlin.htm) [misc/berlin.htm](http://courses.wcupa.edu/jones/his312/misc/berlin.htm). *Isla de Palmas United States v. Netherlands* (1928).

and legislatures) and the key agents in the process of "mobilizing for human rights" are often domestic groups, operating through domestic civil society institutions and practices.27

Although international institutions for implementing it are generally weak, the existence of international human rights law plays a significant role in empowering more capable agents and institutions. One way in which this empowerment occurs is that international human rights law provides a focal point for domestic reform efforts, especially in the case of states that have ratified human rights treaties. Domestic activists can appeal to the international legal obligations their states have undertaken and legitimately appeal to international organizations in their struggle for better compliance.

So far, the Practice has been less successful with respect to modifying the other three norms and mitigating their damaging effects. Apart from including in its major documents the right of individuals to exit their state—the importance of which should not be underestimated—international human rights law has done little to moderate the norm regarding control of immigration, except by encouraging the recognition of a very limited right of sanctuary for victims of political persecution.

With respect to the resource control norm, international human rights law has had some impact so far as it has supported the notion that all people have a right to democratic government and includes a number of rights which, if realized, tend to create the conditions for democratization. To the extent that states become democratic, the accountability of the government to the people lessens the risk that the resource control privilege will be abused. When governments are accountable through democratic processes, they are less able to pillage the country's resources to line their own pockets.

In the case of the borrowing privilege, the prospects are less encouraging. Even where governments are responsive to the public, irresponsible borrowing can and does occur, because the public may be all too willing to impose burdens on future generations. The most promising role for international human rights law and the activism for which it provides a focal point in mitigating the damage of the borrowing privilege norm lies in supporting domestic rights regimes that limit the discrepancy between the interests of government officials and the interests of the public.

If states conscientiously implemented the various social and economic rights that further the welfare purpose of the international legal human rights system—securing for all the conditions for a minimally good or decent life—this would preclude the worst abuses of the resource privilege. Unfortunately, the various domestic, regional, and international agents and institutions of the Practice have been much less successful in holding states accountable for realizing these rights than has been the case with the civil and political rights. Whether this discrepancy can be reduced or eliminated is, of course, one of the greatest challenges for the Practice.

<sup>27</sup> Kathryn Sikking, *The Justice Cascade: How Human Rights are Changing World Politics* (New York: WW Norton & Company, 2011); Beth A. Simmons, *Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic Politics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009).

From the standpoint of international human rights law the social and economic rights are not of lesser priority. They are on an equal footing, so far as the law is concerned, with the civil and political rights. Nevertheless, there are two special difficulties in holding states accountable for their realization, and this fact lessens their ability to constrain abuses of the resource control right and the borrowing privilege. First, some states lack the capacity to realize some of the social and economic rights. The doctrine of "progressive realization" is intended to cope with this problem, but makes it more difficult to hold states accountable. Second, as a broad generalization, it may be more difficult for outsiders to determine the extent to which the failure to realize social and economic rights is the result of deficiencies in state policy as opposed to being the consequence of structural features of the international order and in particular of its economic and financial institutions and practices.

A third consideration is often invoked in this context: It is said that the social and economic rights, being "positive" rights, are necessarily more indeterminate or more open-ended than the "negative" civil and political rights and that this fact also makes it harder to hold states accountable for their realization. In my judgment, this last consideration is often over-stated and depends on an exaggerated contrast between civil and political rights and social and economic rights. The realization of civil and political rights involves the fulfillment of extremely demanding "positive" duties and these, too, are necessarily indeterminate. For example, to realize the right to physical security or the right to equal treatment under the law, a state must undertake large-scale, costly social policies, including the training, monitoring, and disciplining of the police and the personnel of penal institutions, supervision of the training of judge and lawyers, and much more. Despite the special problems involved in holding states accountable for the realization of social and economic rights, existing international human rights law has the potential to limit the opportunities for states abusing the borrowing privilege and the right to control resources indirectly, by holding them accountable for realizing social and economic rights, simply because fulfilling these obligations is incompatible with the worst abuses of these aspects of sovereignty.

One way in which progress could be made in this regard would be for international financial institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to alter their lending policies to make them more effective in reducing the risk of damaging borrowing and for the more economically developed states to restrict the ability of corporations based in them to make resource extraction deals with states that are damaging to their populations. Considerable human rights activism is already focused on both of these reforms.

The resources of an international law-based human rights practice for mitigating the ability of the most powerful states to shape the rules of the international order and their implementation in ways that are damaging to others are much more limited. This is not surprising, given that the most basic idea of the human rights enterprise, so far, has been to develop international legal standards for how states treat those under their jurisdiction—not to regulate power relations among states.

It remains to be seen how successful practice that is grounded in appeals to human rights law will ultimately be in mitigating the deleterious effects of the four norms of sovereignty. Be that as it may, the existence of an international legal human rights system is an important resource for making headway on them. If this is the case, then, given the moral necessity of mitigating the negative effects of these norms, one important reason for having such a system is that it is necessary for making the international order justifiable.

The strong powers of sovereignty, and above all the right against intervention in "domestic affairs" that the pre-human rights international order conferred on states, in combination with the morally-undemanding Principle of Effectivity, not only empowered states to abuse their peoples; it also enabled them to ignore or actively suppress efforts on the part of the population to insist that the state perform basic welfare functions, not just provide security and refrain from abuses, such as irresponsible uses of the resource control power, that detract from their welfare. Given the tremendous power the modern state wields over human lives, the robust authority it claims, and the resources at its disposal, it is reasonable for people to expect that the state perform welfare functions, not just provide physical security and refrain from abusing them in doing so.

In other words, in the modern context at least, the state's performance of welfare functions is a necessary condition for its justification. If this is so, and if the international order equips states with powers that they can and sometimes do use to evade their responsibility to perform welfare functions—or to provide basic social and economic benefits only to some but not all of those under their jurisdiction, then the international order is unjustifiable, unless it is modified so as to reduce this risk. A system of international legal human rights that includes rights with correlative duties on the part of states to provide basic social and economic benefits to all those under their jurisdiction is justified, therefore, as a necessary condition for the justifiability of the international order.

### **Argument 3: The special obligation of states to support the system of international legal human rights**

The key premise of this third justificatory argument is that states have a moral obligation to cooperate with one another to remedy the flaws that make the international order morally unjustifiable. The obligation falls on states and their governments for two reasons: They are the chief beneficiaries of the international order in general and in particular of the four dangerous norms discussed earlier; and they are in the best position to correct its flaws because the international order is created and sustained by them. If the international order is morally unjustifiable without a system of international legal human rights and if governments have an obligation to render it justifiable, then they have a special obligation to support the system of international legal human rights. The moral weight of this obligation and the costs which an agent may rightly be expected to bear in discharging it will vary across states, depending on how much power they have to influence the character of the international order and upon the resources at their disposal.

In this section, I have set out three arguments for having an ILHR system similar to the one that exists. Thus, I have taken the first step toward answering what may be the most neglected question in current philosophical theorizing about human rights, the General Justification Question: Why have a system of international legal human rights? In doing so, I have also provided the initial materials for the first step in answering the Special Justification Question by showing that, to some extent at least, the existing system of international legal human rights performs these valuable functions.

Taken by themselves, the three arguments do not show that having such a system is justified or a good thing, all things considered.28 To establish that stronger claim, one would have to consider the other side of the ledger: the considerations that count against having such a system. In this chapter, I cannot attempt even to identify the potentially countervailing considerations, much less to assess their weight.29 Instead, my purpose has been only to begin the task of justifying the system of ILHRs.

#### **VI. Conclusion**

I will end this investigation by considering a worry about the justificatory arguments I have advanced. It might be objected that they fall short in this respect: At most they show that having a system of ILHRs rather like the existing one is *one* way to achieve the seven benefits I listed earlier and one way to reduce the risks to individuals and groups that the international legal order's conferral of sovereign powers on states produces. Similarly, it might be argued that supporting the system of ILHRs is only one way for states and governments to discharge the special obligation they have to mitigate these risks. Other kinds of institutional responses might suffice.

This may be true, but it is not damaging to the justificatory case I have made, for several reasons. First, for this objection to have much force, a coherent alternative would have to be spelled out—a fairly determinate alternative institutional practice capable of providing the seven benefits and significantly mitigating the risks entailed by sovereignty as constructed in the existing international legal order would have to be articulated. I, for one, am not confident that this can be done. Second, the alternative arrangement would have to be shown to be feasible, where this involves showing (i) that we can get there from here, (ii) that we can get there from here by a morally acceptable path, (iii) that the benefits of pursuing this alternative arrangement would exceed the costs of pursuing it, and (iv) that the alternative arrangement would be stable. I think it is very likely that it would be a bad bargain to pursue an alternative arrangement at this point,ratherthan devoting our energiesinstead to improving the system of ILHRs and the human rights practice that is anchored on it. Even if, were we to start from scratch, there is some alternative arrangement that would satisfy the condition of the three justificatory arguments, given where we are, those arguments still provide strong support for the existing system. In brief, to justify an existing institutional order, one need not show that it is superior to—or even as good as—all alternatives. Considerations of costeffectiveness, broadly understood, can favor the status quo, even if it is not uniquely good, much less optimal, especially when we take into account the costs and risks of undertaking the transition to an alternative arrangement.30

<sup>28</sup> Nor does it show that having a system of international legal rights is the *only* way to achieve all of these benefits. That would be an excessively strong requirement for the system being justified.

<sup>29</sup> In *The Heart of Human Rights*, I address this task.

<sup>30</sup> Much of this essay is drawn from Buchanan, *The Heart of Human Rights*, chs. 2, 3, and 4.