---
title: "Do We Have a Human Right to the Political Determinants of Health?"
author:
  - name: "Kimberley Brownlee"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "502–514"
citation_key: "brownlee2015health"
---

## <span id="page-516-0"></span> [Do We Have a Human Right to the Political](#page-8-14)  [Determinants of Health?](#page-8-14)

### *Kimberley Brownlee*1

### **Introduction**

The human right to health necessarily lies somewhere between the too-demanding idea of a right to be *healthy* and the too-limited idea of a right merely to *health care*. The problem, as Jonathan Wolff points out in his contribution to this collection (chapter 27), is to figure out where exactly the human right lies. International agreements such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) state that human beings have both a right to a standard of living adequate to health and, equally importantly, a right to various other underlying determinants of health, such as food, clothing, and housing as well as medical care.2 The question, as Wolff notes, is whether the human right to health is simply an agglomeration of rights to underlying determinants of health or whether it has a more determinate conceptual core. If it is an agglomeration of rights, then how do we know which underlying determinants of health are parts of that agglomeration since so many things can affect health?

This is an important question, and it frames my discussion in what follows. Some of the things that centrally affect health are not often explicitly examined in relation to a right to health. The most notable of these are human-generated threats to physical and mental health such as chronic physical insecurity, constant fear of attack, and chronic stress as well as actual attacks, abuse, mistreatment, and discrimination, which compound the effects of insecurity and stress. Protection from such threats counts among what I shall call the *underlying political determinants of health*. These determinants of health can be divided into two broad categories. The first category concerns protecting people from direct or indirect discrimination in their access to health services. The

1 I thank Thomas Parr for his helpful feedback and research assistance on this paper. I thank Matthew Liao for helpful comments on this paper.

2 UDHR Article 25 states: '(1) Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.' The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) goes further. Article 12 states: '1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. 2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall include those necessary for: (a) The provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate and of infant mortality and for the healthy development of the child; (b) The improvement of all aspects of environmental and industrial hygiene; (c) The prevention, treatment and control of epidemic, endemic, occupational and other diseases; (d) The creation of conditions which would assure to all medical service and medical attention in the event of sickness.'

second concerns protecting people from the more general disadvantages, mistreatment, discrimination, abuse, and stress that go with vulnerability and persecution, and which render people more likely either to be injured or become unwell or to die early. In what follows, I explore the nature of these two types of political determinants of health, and consider reasons for and against including all of them, particularly those of the second type, in an agglomeration of rights comprising the human right to health.

## **I. Political Determinants of Health**

Human-generated threats to mental and physical health are the life experiences of persecuted peoples. They are the life experiences, for example, of women and girls who live in societies where there is a persistent, credible threat of physical assault, sexual assault, rape, and domestic abuse as well as threats of social ostracism and material deprivation if they are raped, and few, if any, legal avenues for redress. In Afghanistan, for instance, several hundred women are presently in prison for the 'moral crime' of being raped.3 Psychology studies indicate that victims of physical and sexual violence experience distress that sometimes fails to resolve and instead develops into a chronic, though heterogeneous, symptom pattern whose core features include fear/avoidance, affective constriction, disturbance of self-concept, and sexual disturbance. 4 These features are consistent with the criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which is associated with a variety of anxiety-related symptoms such as sleep disturbance, avoidance of any stimuli associated with the trauma, and intensification of anxiety when confronted with reminders of the trauma. Mary Koss states that, 'Even when evaluated many years after the assault, victims were significantly more likely than nonvictims to qualify for psychiatric diagnoses that included major depression, alcohol abuse/dependence, drug abuse/dependence, generalized anxiety, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder.'5

Similarly, human-generated threats to health are the life experiences of children who grow up in brutal environments, who face a constant, credible risk of mistreatment, and for whom there are few effective legal, social, and political mechanisms for their protection. In times of war, for example, as the United Nations Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict notes, 'girls are raped and suffer from other forms of sexual violence with detrimental effect on their physical and mental health. When associated with an armed group, girls might be forced into marriage and early pregnancy.' And, even when conflicts end and armed groups make commitments to release children, they sometimes refuse to give up the girls, who continue to be held captive as 'wives'.6

<sup>3</sup> See Jeremy Kelly, 'Afghan Woman to be Freed from Jail after Agreeing to Marry Rapist' *The Guardian*, 1 December 2011: [http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/01/afghan-woman-freed-marry](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/01/afghan-woman-freed-marry-rapist?newsfeed=true)[rapist?newsfeed=true](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/01/afghan-woman-freed-marry-rapist?newsfeed=true).

<sup>4</sup> Mary Koss states that ' . . .some experts consider female sexual abuse and assault victims to be the largest single group of PTSD sufferers'. See Mary Koss, 'The Women's Mental Health Research Agenda: Violence Against Women', *American Psychologist*, 45(3) (1990): 375.

<sup>5</sup> Koss, 'The Women's Mental Health Research Agenda', 376.

<sup>6</sup> 'Girl Child', United Nations Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict: [http://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/effects-of-conflict/girl-child/](http://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/effects-of-conflict/girl-child/.).

Such threats to mental and physical health are also the life experiences of persecuted cultural minorities, persecuted people with impairments, persecuted elderly people, and people living in war torn countries. The stress and fear that pervade their lives as well as the actual mistreatments they suffer have similar psychological and physiological effects as chronic hunger and thirst in setting off a chain of anxiety inducing reactions, known as the 'fight or flight' response, that are associated with high blood pressure, increased risk of heart attack, stroke, and depression, and more rapid ageing. Studies indicate that the changes in the morphology and chemistry of brain regions, such as the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and amygdala, in response to acute and chronic stress are largely reversible if the chronic stress lasts only for weeks, but that it is unclear whether prolonged stress for months or years can have irreversible effects on the brain.7

Human-generated threats to physical and mental health are exacerbated when people experience a clustering, or joint frequency, of multiple disadvantages. As Wolff argues in his book, *Disadvantage*, co-authored with Avner de Shalit, typically, people who are vulnerable to one type of disadvantage such as unemployment are often also vulnerable to other disadvantages that can accumulate over time, such as homelessness, loss of social networks, and severe illness. The people who are at risk of poverty are also often the people who are vulnerable to abuse, have little political voice, and are less socially integrated, less well educated, and less healthy. The effects of each of these individual disadvantages are compounded by the agglomeration of disadvantage.8 In addition, as Wolff and de Shalit observe, some disadvantages are corrosive in that their presence leads to further disadvantages.9 A lack of education is corrosive, for example, as it undermines a variety of further capabilities including caring, nursing, and health-related capabilities.

Human-generated threats to physical and mental health in vulnerable populations are further exacerbated in financially difficult times. For instance, a 2013 report from Plan International and the Overseas Development Institute states that the 'brunt of the recent global economic recession has been borne by women and girls: this demographic is more likely to be poor, to drop out of school, and to die sooner.'10 The report finds that family poverty has a greater impact on girls' survival than on boys' survival, where a 1 percent fall in GDP increases infant mortality by 7.4 deaths per 1,000 births for girls versus 1.5 deaths for boys. The report also finds that maternal mortality, which disproportionately affects adolescent mothers, increases during times of

<sup>7</sup> Bruce S. McEwen, 'Central Effects of Stress Hormones in Health and Disease: Understanding the Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress and Stress Mediators', *European Journal of Pharmacology*, 583 (2008): 174–85.

<sup>8</sup> Jonathan Wolff and Avner de Shalit, *Disadvantage* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007) ch. 7, 120ff.

<sup>9</sup> Wolff and de Shalit, *Disadvantage*, 10, 121.

<sup>10</sup> Jessica Prois, 'Global Economic Recession Causing More Poverty, Deaths For Females Than Males: Report', in *Huffington Post*, 23 January 2013: [http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/23/](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/23/global-economic-recession-females_n_2534912.html) [global-economic-recession-females_n_2534912.html](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/23/global-economic-recession-females_n_2534912.html). Prois quotes Nigel Chapman, CEO of Plan International, who says that: 'It is little surprise that the most vulnerable suffer more in times of austerity but to see the impact in higher mortality rates, reduced life expectancy, less opportunities and greater risks for girls and boys is stark… '

economic crisis as cuts are made to health care budgets.11 Between 1990 and 2008, the number of women's deaths in childbirth doubled in both the United States and Canada, a statistic that is worrying irrespective of whether it can be attributed in part to economic difficulties.12

Undoubtedly, economic constraints hinder governments in their efforts to honour the duties generated by the right to health.13 In this regard, Wolff cites the UN Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights's General Comments, which address substantive issues arising from the implementation of the ICESCR. General Comment No. 14 (2000) (hereinafter GC14) explicitly addresses the human right to health (ICESCR Article 12), and, amongst other things, observes that poor countries may find it hard to discharge the duties generated by the right to health due to their lack of resources. The GC14 draws a distinction that Wolff endorses between the *progressive realization* of the right to health and the *core obligations* of the right to health. The latter refer to obligations that have immediate effect, such as:

. . .the guarantee that the right will be exercised without discrimination of any kind (art. 2.2) and the obligation to take steps (art. 2.1) towards the full realization of article 12. Such steps must be deliberate, concrete and targeted towards the full realization of the right to health.14

The idea of progressive realization acknowledges that it is unrealistic, as Wolff puts it, to expect poor states to be able to offer the level of medical care and health protection available in wealthy states, and it would be wrong to accuse them of violating the human rights of their people simply in virtue of this comparison.15

This claim about poor states is certainly valid, but there are two points to note about economic constraints. The first is captured by the GC14's examples of core obligations, which highlight that resource constraints should not allow for incidental or intentional discrimination in health services against a particular demographic, such as women and girls. Governments facing economic constraints must make concerted efforts to ensure that the brunt of economic difficulties is not borne by a particular

11 Currently, pregnancy is a leading cause of death for 14–19 year-old girls. Maria Stavropoulou and Nicola Jones, 'Off the Balance Sheet: The Impact of the Economic Crisis on Girls and Young Women', *Plan International and Overseas Development Institute Report* (2013): [https://plan-international.org/](https://plan-international.org/files/global/publications/economics/off-the-balance-sheet-english) [files/global/publications/economics/off-the-balance-sheet-english](https://plan-international.org/files/global/publications/economics/off-the-balance-sheet-english).

12 Lizzie Malcolm, 'International Women's Day: Political Rights Around the World Mapped', *The Guardian*, 8 March 2013: [http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/datablog/interactive/2013/mar/08/](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/datablog/interactive/2013/mar/08/international-womens-day-political-rights) [international-womens-day-political-rights](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/datablog/interactive/2013/mar/08/international-womens-day-political-rights).

13 In related work, Wolff observes that ' . . .some states are unwilling or unable to act, while others that may be willing are hobbled by the power of globalizing forces that inhibit their release from sustained poverty. Nevertheless, we can still say that in the first instance the duty falls on the state of which the person is a citizen; if that is problematic then the country of residence; and as a last resort the international community'. See Jonathan Wolff, 'The Human Right to Health', in S. Benatar and G. Brock (eds.), *Global Health and Global Health Ethics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 111.

14 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2000), GC14, August 2000.

15 The GC14 explicitly states that well-off states have a special responsibility and interest to assist poor states in giving priority to the provision of medical aid, distribution and management of resources, such as safe and potable water, food and medical supplies, and financial aid should be given to the most vulnerable or marginalized groups of the population.

demographic, and especially not by a demographic that is already disadvantaged and vulnerable.16

Second, for many vulnerable groups, such as women and girls, it is not only in poor countries that governments fail to honour their duties to attend to these persons' health needs including the underlying political determinants of their health. For instance, some of the countries that rank among the worst places in the world to be a woman are not poor countries. Industrialized nations such as Saudi Arabia and, perhaps, India cannot claim that they lack the resources to secure either women's and girls' basic medical needs or the underlying political determinants of their health.

In Saudi Arabia, there is little protection of either direct or indirect political determinants of women's and girls' health. Concerning direct determinants of health, there are, for example, no laws against domestic violence and marital rape. The law also prevents a woman from being admitted to a government hospital unless accompanied by a male relative. Additionally, male relatives may prohibit a woman from being treated by a male gynaecologist or obstetrician even in an emergency and only male relatives may sign the consent forms for an urgent, invasive, medical procedure.17

Concerning indirect determinants of health, women do not have the right to vote and hence have few legal and political channels through which to push for greater political and legal equality (though it has been announced that they will be allowed to vote in the 2015 municipal elections).18 Also, women and girls are not allowed to travel, study, or work without permission from their male guardians, and the country has a *de facto* ban on women driving, all of which exacerbates the stress of extreme dependency, and makes women and girls vulnerable both to corrosive disadvantages and to clusterings of disadvantage.19 Although some steps have been taken to improve conditions for women and girls, these steps are modest. Is the political impotence in Saudi Arabia to remedy the situation of women and girls on a par, morally, with having few economic resources? This would be a convenient excuse for inactivity.

Similarly, in India, which has seen rapid economic growth in recent years, there is no law against marital rape, and reports indicate that crimes against women in India are on the rise. According to the National Crime Records Bureau, there was a 7.1 percent rise in recorded crimes against women between 2010 and 2011 with the biggest

16 The GC14 remarks on the 'highest attainable standard' stated in the ICESCR, noting that in low resource settings, there are severe limits to what is attainable. This is certainly true since low resource settings face the threats of no water, little food, poor shelter, poor medicine, and so on. But, high stress settings also pose severe limits on what is attainable, and high stress settings do not inevitably coincide with low resources or vice versa. We need not take anything like the 'highest attainable standard of health' to see the extent to which the right to health depends on protection from chronic stress and threatening environments.

17 A.E.H. Mobaraki and B. Söderfeldt, 'Gender Inequity in Saudi Arabia and Its Role in Public Health', *Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal*, 16(1) (2010): 113–18. See this review article for additional references on forced marriage, underage marriage, female illiteracy, maternal mortality, restrictions on abortion and contraception, and male polygamy in Saudi Arabia.

18 Human Rights Watch, *World Report 2012: Saudi Arabia*: [http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2012/](http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2012/world-report-2012-saudi-arabia.) [world-report-2012-saudi-arabia](http://www.hrw.org/world-report-2012/world-report-2012-saudi-arabia.).

19 Human Rights Watch, *World Report 2012*.

rise being in cases that fall under the Dowry Prohibition Act (up 27.7 percent), cases of kidnapping and abduction (up 19.4 percent year on year) and cases of rape (up 9.2 percent).20 Concerning women's health care in India, only 47 percent of women receive skilled assistance during childbirth.21 Between 1990 and 2008, the number of women who died in childbirth more than halved, from 570 per 500,000 births to 230 per 500,000 births, which is encouraging, but 230 deaths is still 20 times the figure in other G20 countries such as Canada and the United Kingdom.22 And, currently, the child-sex ratio in India is 914 girls for every 1,000 boys, a figure that is at its worst in the history of independent India.23

The question to ask is whether the failures of countries, be they affluent or not, to attend to the underlying political determinants of health of women, girls, and other vulnerable groups are principally (1) failures to honour the *core obligations* of the human right to health, (2) failures to commit to the long-term *progressive realization* of the right to health, or, indeed, (3) no failure at all in relation to the right to health, but instead failures to honour other human rights. The point made earlier about avoiding discrimination in access to health services signals that there must be *some* political rights in any credible agglomeration of rights comprising the human right to health. The first type of political determinant of health noted at the outset of this paper—non-discrimination in access to health services—is uncontroversially part of a right to health (and the debate then must centre on what 'non-discriminatory access' requires). But, are *all* political determinants of health parts of such an agglomeration?24 The second type of political determinant—legal equality and protection from mistreatment and chronic stress—is much more contentious as a part of a right to health. I shall therefore explore, first, some reasons to think that political determinants of this second type are parts of the human right to health, and then some reasons to think they are not, one of which I take to be decisive.

24 The general lack of attention to political determinants of health is reflected in the GC14's efforts to specify the location of the right to health between healthiness and mere health care by highlighting four features of the right to health: 1) availability, 2) accessibility, 3) acceptability, and 4) quality. All four of these features clearly connote provision of medical care as well as, perhaps, water, food, clothing, and housing. They do not align well with the kinds of political determinants of health I have discussed. I agree with Wolff that one comes away from the GC14 with a sense that it has avoided the main question, which is: When is a failure to supply medical care or other determinants of health nevertheless *not* a human rights failure? The narrowness of the GC14's lens is regrettable. And, Wolff buys into this narrowness when he talks about courts' efforts to make sense of the right to health. His use of the language of 'supply', and his attention to the most common claims, which are for medical treatment in the form of drugs, surgery or equipment, feeds into the narrow, and intuitively physicalist, view of human health reflected in the GC14.

<sup>20</sup> Helen Pidd, 'Why is India So Bad for Women?', *The Guardian*, 23 July 2012: [http://www.guardian.](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jul/23/why-india-bad-for-women) [co.uk/world/2012/jul/23/why-india-bad-for-women.](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jul/23/why-india-bad-for-women)

<sup>21</sup> Malcolm, 'International Women's Day'. 22 Malcolm, 'International Women's Day'.

<sup>23</sup> Sruthi Gottipati, 'Is it a Good Time to Be a Girl in India?' *The New York Times*, 11 October 2012: [http://](http://india.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/11/is-it-a-good-time-to-be-a-girl-in-india/) [india.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/11/is-it-a-good-time-to-be-a-girl-in-india/](http://india.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/11/is-it-a-good-time-to-be-a-girl-in-india/). The *Global Gender Gap Report 2012* gives a slightly worse gender ratio for India of 0.89, which apparently has not changed over the past year, Ricardo Hausmann, Laura Tyson, and Saadia Zahidi, *The Global Gender Gap Report 2012.* Geneva: World Economic Forum, 27:<http://www.weforum.org/reports/global-gender-gap-report-2012>.

## **II. Reasons to Include All Political Determinants in the Right to Health**

Wolff gives a nod to what I am calling the 'underlying political determinants of health' in his explication of different ways for governments to fail in their duties to respect, to protect, and to fulfil the human right to health:25

Where a state is unjust. . .it is very likely that there will be numerous violations regarding the unpopular or minority group[s] that it neglects or persecutes. This may include other forms of discrimination, such as access to law, and treatment with respect to welfare services and within the criminal justice system. In relation to health the many references in GC14 to the importance of non-discrimination (Sections 3, 12(b), 12(c), 19, 20–27, 34, 35) and perhaps the right to be free from torture and non-consensual medical treatment and experimentation (Section 8) could fall under this head, as well as under several others. Reference to gender difference (Section 10) picks up on injustice, whether 'overt' or not, to use the language of Section 19. Section 12(b) lists a range of groups that could suffer discrimination including older people and people with disabilities, as well as ethnic minorities. Some of these violations will be violations of the duty to respect (Section 50) such as 'the denial of access to health facilities, goods and services, to particular individuals as a result of de jure or de facto discrimination.' But failure of duties to protect, for example failing to protect women against violence (Section 51) are also possible, as well as failures to fulfil by discriminatory allocation practices (Section 52).

Although Wolff does not pursue this thought further, or consider whether some particular political determinants of health fall outside the human right to health, nevertheless his treatment of these issues inspired the observations I am making about the importance of attending to human-generated threats to health in general, and political determinants of health in particular.

Amongst other things, Wolff says that the task of setting out the content of the human right to health really comes down to setting out an account of the duties that governments and other actors, whether national or international, have in relation to health. And, the right to health, he says, is a protection against certain types of neglect and mistreatment (though, perhaps, not all). From these points, we can derive the first reason to include *all* political determinants in the right to health. Briefly, if we are truly committed to the human right to health, then a paramount objective must be to sort out the legal inequality, moral inequality, neglect, and abuse of disadvantaged groups that not only impair their access to health resources, but also expose them to chronic stress and mistreatment that impair their health. Put differently, appreciating the central impact that chronic stress and mistreatment have on health should prompt us to put the focus as much on securing non-threatening, low-stress environments as on securing drugs and surgery.

A related, instrumental reason to include all political determinants of health in the right to health concerns preventative medicine. Given the exacerbating effects that

25 Wolff, this volume, ch. 27, 500.

stress has on health, focusing on securing non-stressful environments is undeniably useful, and may do as much good for persons as focusing on curative medicine, drugs, and surgery.

A further related reason not only to include, but to emphasize political determinants of health in the right to health is that it might lessen Wolff's practical worry about the implementation of health rights in the courts, by putting the focus on legal and political measures rather than on comprehensive health care rights beyond minimal, preventative care and the guarantees of food, shelter, water, basic medicines, and physical and mental security.26

A final, pragmatic reason to emphasize political determinants is that the right to health is a potentially powerful tool. First, a lot of other rights and goods are dependent on its protection for their realization.27 Second, it is less contentious than some other socio-economic human rights such as the right to be free from poverty. Including political determinants of health under the banner of the human right to health may make it more likely that they will be taken seriously than if they are not put under that banner.

In contrast with these reasons, there are at least three reasons to doubt that the second type of political determinants of health noted here are part of the human right to health. The first two reasons are mistaken, but the third is compelling. Briefly, the first reason says that political determinants of health such as legal equality and protection from mistreatment do not meet the stringent conditions for human rights status, namely, the conditions of *standard recurrent threats* to health (in combination with other features). The second reason says that rights to political determinants of health are conceptually redundant and, hence, unnecessary in a specification of the human right to health. The third says that the duties that governments and other individuals have to guarantee the political determinants of health are indeed human-rights-based duties, but they are not *health*-rights-based duties because the arguments for health rights are principally instrumental and the arguments for equal recognition and adequate protection are not. Let me take these three reasons in turn.

## **III. Reasons Against Political Determinants as Part of the Right to Health**

#### **A.╇ Standard recurrent threats**

Political determinants of health such as legal equality and protection from mistreatment are not part of the human right to health, so this argument goes, because they do not satisfy the requisite conditions to warrant human rights status. The conditions for human rights status are those of standard recurrent threats, to use James

<sup>26</sup> Certainly, proper attention to the health rights of a vulnerable group, such as women and girls, will require some expensive provisions such as ensuring, at the very least, that all women have access to skilled assistance at childbirth, but this does not make such provisions 'non-minimal'.

<sup>27</sup> Using Wolff and de Shalit's language, we might say that the human right to health is *fertile*. Fertile functionings are those functionings 'which spread their good effects over several categories, either directly or by reducing risk to other functionings', Wolff and de Shalit, *Disadvantage*, 122.

Nickel's phrase, or common, serious, remediable threats, to use Henry Shue's phrase. A threat is common if it is ordinary or standard. A threat is sufficiently serious according to Wolff (which I will not dispute) if its neglect should be a matter of concern for the international community. A threat is remediable if it can be practically addressed. However, Wolff notes correctly that 'the failure to research how to remedy a non-remediable ordinary and serious threat could be a human rights failure, which is especially important in the area of health'.28

The claim that legal inequality and vulnerability to mistreatment are not common, serious, and remediable threats is unpersuasive. First, on commonness, the data cited earlier on vulnerable groups such as women and girls make plain that the political determinants of health I have discussed pass the commonness test. For such people, political threats to their physical and mental health are pervasive experiences in their lives. These threats are not unique to a small subset of persons within these groups, and they are not isolated to one-off instances of abuse, neglect, or discrimination.

Second, concerning seriousness, political threats to vulnerable people's mental and physical health are sufficiently serious to warrant human rights status because protection from chronic stress, abuse, and mistreatment are no less pressing than other things that more transparently fit under the heading of 'underlying determinants of health' such as food, clothing, housing, and medical care. The abuse of girls who are held captive by armed groups, the neglect of women in childbirth, and the practice of female infanticide are cases in point.

However, we might look at seriousness in a different way and argue that, in politically fraught contexts, persons' *health* is a secondary issue and not the truly *serious* issue. For example, when a paramilitary group recruits child soldiers (typically through brutal means), the threats this poses to the children's *health* seem secondary. To say that such treatment is a human rights failure because it robs children of their right to health seems to put the focus in the wrong place. Similarly, when women face a persistent, credible threat of being raped, to say that this is a human rights failure because it threatens their right to health again seems to put the focus in the wrong place. In both cases, undeniably the mistreatment does threaten health, but something more fundamental than health is at stake, which can broadly go under the heading of basic respect. These observations lay the foundation for a credible reason to hold that many political determinants of health are not part of the right to health, which I turn to later.

Finally, concerning remediability, I have doubts about the credibility of this condition for human rights protection, but, if we accept it, then the answer to whether political determinants satisfy it is contingent on various facts and assumptions. Presumably, only certain barriers to remediability should be taken seriously. A state that is under siege, attacked in war, or suffering from a natural disaster faces barriers to human rights protections that may indeed be irremediable. No state can avoid all of the stress and risks that go with such crises. But other stressful environments, such as those experienced by women and girls in Saudi Arabia, can be avoided. Wealthy countries like Saudi Arabia should not be able to plead that the threats faced by women

28 Wolff, this volume, ch. 27, 495.

and girls are (at least presently) irremediable because there is not the political will to improve their condition and redress violence, mistreatment, and discrimination against them. Women and girls have human rights against the health-impairing effects of their disadvantaged condition in Saudi Arabia even though remedying that condition is presently politically difficult. The stress of their extreme dependency and their vulnerability to attack as well as the lack of redress and the knowledge that there is no option for redress are all things that the government can seek to remedy even if the efforts may be, for the present, largely ineffective.

The duties that governments fail to honour by not attending to political determinants of health can be specified according to the taxonomy of duties that Wolff discusses, namely, duties to respect, to protect, and to fulfil the right to health. First, if government officials such as police and soldiers rape women and girls as control mechanisms, punishments, or interrogation techniques, then they fail in their duty to *respect* women's and girls' mental health, physical security, and much else. Second, if government officials or police know that assaults and rapes regularly occur and they fail to intervene, then they fail to *protect* women and girls from violations of their mental and physical health by others. And, finally, if the government does not prosecute private parties who abuse or assault women and girls, or does not even have laws on the books that prohibit acts such as marital rape, then it fails to *fulfil* women's and girls' rights to physical security as an underlying determinant of mental and physical health. That said, the fact that governments' failures to honour women's and girls' rights to mental and physical security *can* be framed in relation to the right to health does not mean that ultimately this is the best way to think about such failures, as I argue later.

Together, these observations show that the standard-recurrent-threats objection against including all political determinants of health in the human right to health is not compelling.

#### **B.╇ Conceptual redundancy**

A second reason not to incorporate all political determinants of health into the human right to health is conceptual redundancy. The argument here is not so much that political determinants of health such as legal equality and protection from mistreatment are not part of the right to health, but that it is not necessary to identify them as part of that right since guarantees of legal equality and protection from mistreatment are necessary pre-conditions for the right to health to exist at all. The right to health cannot be either achieved or fully maintained without these guarantees.

In response, even if political determinants of health were conceptually redundant, subsuming them under other things in an agglomeration of health rights could distract us from the distinctive health-related problems that political threats pose. And, not subsuming them under other rights could enable us to recognize the distinctive political dimensions of our health needs. In short, there is practical value in identifying political determinants of health as distinctive health-related concerns.

That said, there is a cost in incorporating political claims against mistreatment and legal inequality within an account of the right to health. It is that our political claims are not purely, or even principally, health-based. Acknowledging the significance of our political claims is part of respecting each other as persons. It is in this thought that the real reason lies not to incorporate all political determinants of health within the right to health.

#### **C.╇ Instrumental value and intrinsic value**

The most credible reason to exclude the second type of political determinants from the human right to health turns on the grounds for protecting health in the first place.

The right to health is analogous to the right to education in that the principal arguments for its protection are instrumental. Undeniably, the right to health, like the right to education, protects something that is valuable in itself. The experience of becoming fit, alert, and healthy, like the experience of learning, is typically an intrinsically valuable experience, and the state of being healthy, like that of being educated, is typically an intrinsically valuable state. Nevertheless, the central arguments for securing and enforcing a human right to health, like those for a human right to education, are instrumental. They include, first, the instrumental benefits of each person having the capacity to lead her life and to contribute meaningfully to the human community, as well as, second, the benefits of protecting health in general within and across societies, and, third, through that, the benefits of promoting global ideals and values for the maintenance of peace. In addition to these community-oriented instrumental values, there is, as Joseph Raz notes, a more personal instrumental value in health, which is that health greatly increases a person's prospects of having a rewarding life: 'If not all, at least many forms of ill-health—involving as it does pain, suffering and disability—make fulfilling and satisfying life much harder to achieve, or even impossible.'29

Raz thinks, as I do, that it is principally the instrumental value of health, and not its intrinsic value, that grounds the human right to health. But, his argument for that view is an odd one. He says that, absent special relations, no one has a duty to secure for any other person a feeling of physical (or mental) well-being, but they may have a duty to secure for people the *opportunity* to have a fulfilling life.30 This is right, but since, as noted at the outset (and indeed as Raz himself notes), the right to health is not a right to be *healthy*, there is no proposal on the table that the duties the right to health generates would include a duty for anyone to *secure* for anyone else a feeling of physical or mental well-being.31

My own argument for the instrumental basis of the right to health is that governments and individual persons have a duty to ensure that we are able to contribute meaningfully to our communities, that our health and opportunities to lead a full life are not unnecessarily put at risk by the unhealthiness of others, and that the ideals and

<sup>29</sup> Joseph Raz, 'Human Rights in the Emerging World Order', this volume, ch. 11, 229.

<sup>30</sup> Raz, 'Human Rights in the Emerging World Order', 229.

<sup>31</sup> Raz observes that ' . . .it would be silly to think that people really have a right to be healthy, a right which is violated every time they are not healthy' Raz, 'Human Rights in the Emerging World Order', 229.

values of international cooperation and peace are furthered through the cultivation of safety and well-being including emphasis on preventative medicine and decent care.

In this idea that the grounds for the right to health are instrumental, we find a way to distinguish the determinants of health that should be protected as part of that right from the determinants that should not be, because the grounds for the latter determinants do not lie in the instrumental benefits of health. We would be acting on the wrong reason if we were, for example, to protect women from rape and children from brutal environments because physical and mental security are underlying determinants of health and hence are instrumentally valuable. Certainly, they have this value. But the real reason to protect women and children in these ways is that it respects them as people. The core reasons are hence non-instrumental. Therefore, although protecting the legal and political claims of vulnerable groups is an underlying determinant of their health, we should not view governments' *health*-related duties as including this task.

Saying that the principal reasons to protect the political claims of women, girls, and other vulnerable groups are non-instrumental does not prevent us from favouring a government policy that has, in addition, the side-benefit of good instrumental effects for those groups. If, for example, a government can choose between two policies that will reduce the frequency of rape by identical amounts, but only one of those policies will have beneficial, health-related instrument effects, the government may, of course, favour that policy.32

Briefly, by way of conclusion, denying that the second type of political determinants are part of the right to health has an advantage when it comes to the degree of protection. One challenge for health-related guarantees is to determine how much protection is a reasonable amount of protection. Wolff notes that, in relation to the right to health, *sometimes* a reasonable guarantee of a reasonable level of protection against a standard threat is actually an absolute level of protection—the example of torture is a case in point. But, Wolff acknowledges, this is not universally so:33

The main point is that human rights, so understood, generally in the first instance call on the government to put effective institutions in place—rather like a Rawlsian basic structure—rather than to meet the particular needs of particular individuals. Of course where there is institutional failure individuals may well pursue their own complaints, and one such failure may be where a government in its actions has failed to *respect* an individual's rights, by, for example, engaging in violent or arbitrary acts against an individual. But where a government has failed to *protect* individuals against threats, or to *fulfil* a right, an individual claim should have something of the character of a test case or implicit class action. That is, in the general case the suit should only succeed if it is an example of something that happens on a larger scale, and the government ought, by way of remedy, [to] change its practices rather than (or in addition to) providing individual compensation.

<sup>32</sup> I thank Thomas Parr for prompting me to consider this point.

<sup>33</sup> Wolff, this volume, ch. 27, 497.

What this seems to mean in relation to health, Wolff says, is that 'failure to protect and, especially, fulfil should primarily be *condition-based* (or non-condition group based, such as ethnicity) rather than *person-based*. (Failure to respect, in contrast, could easily take any form.).'34

Now, if we were to incorporate all political determinants of health into the right to health, this would not secure an absolute guarantee against many forms of mistreatment that should be absolutely prohibited. Protection from rape, for example, like protection from torture, should be an absolute guarantee. If we follow Wolff's reasoning, then when private parties perpetrate individual acts of rape, this would signal a government's failure to *protect* persons and perhaps failure to *fulfil* their claims to physical security, and thus should succeed as a human rights lawsuit only if it is an example of something that happens on a larger scale. And, to remedy it, the government ought to change its practices rather than (or in addition to) providing individual compensation. By contrast, if we approach human rights to legal equality and protection from mistreatment independently of their impact on health, then we can more easily take a categorical stand against political risks and say that only an absolute guarantee is a reasonable amount of protection.