---
title: "The Content of the Human Right to Health"
author:
  - name: "Jonathan Wolff"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "491–501"
citation_key: "wolff2015health"
---

## <span id="page-505-0"></span> [The Content of the Human Right to Health](#page-8-13)

*Jonathan Wolff*

The human right to health is attracting increasing attention from philosophers, and a range of questions has been asked. The most fundamental one, no doubt, is whether there are good reasons for believing that there is any such thing. I have directly addressed that question elsewhere,1 but here my concern is somewhat different, and I address the fundamental question only in more indirect fashion. My aim is to consider a type of criticism that has the conclusion that there could not be—or perhaps should not be—a human right to health. The core of that objection is that there are insuperable difficulties in attempting to specify the content of the human right to health. This type of objection splits into two. One is conceptual; that the content of the human right to health cannot be coherently specified. The second is of a more practical nature: when specified the human right to health leads to unattractive, or at least sub-optimal, health policies. Answering these objections is the task of this paper, and in fact I will argue that the two objections need to be answered together. Understanding the conceptual core is necessary to answer the practical challenge and dealing with the practical challenge helps to specify the conceptual core. If I am successful this would show only that there could be a human right to health. Other arguments would be needed to establish that, in fact, there is one.

In international law the human right to health makes a relatively subdued appearance in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). Human beings are declared to have a right to a standard of living adequate to health, and, insightfully, a right to various other underlying determinants of health, such as food, clothing, and housing, but also medical care. However, the drafters of the later International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) went much further, declaring a universal right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. In doing this one has to admit that they did not make things easy for their defenders. For, as Onora O'Neill has pressed, what is to be made of the idea of the 'highest attainable standard of health'? Consider a low resource environment such as rural India or sub-Saharan Africa. If we mean the globally highest attainable standard then we are setting a utopian standard. If we mean the locally highest attainable standard are

<sup>1</sup> Jonathan Wolff, 'The Human Right to Health', in S. Benatar and G. Brock, *Global Health and Global Health Ethics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011); Jonathan Wolff, 'Global Justice and Health: The Basis of the Global Health Duty', in J. Millum and E. Emanuel (eds.), *Global Justice and Bioethics* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012); Jonathan Wolff, *The Human Right to Health* (New York: Norton, 2012); Jonathan Wolff, 'The Demands of the Human Right to Health', *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society: Supplementary Volume* 86 (2012).

we not setting our target far too low?2 A related difficulty is pointed out by Joseph Raz, although overall he is much more sympathetic to the human right to health than O'Neill. He points out that the notion of the 'highest attainable' standard does not specify whether it is the 'highest attainable' or 'highest attainable, given proper weight to all other considerations, including other moral rights and worth-while goals' (this volume, chapter 11, 230). Conceptually, there seems to be much work to be done.

How is progress to be made in specifying a determinate content for the human right to health? The United Nations has not stood still, and among several initiatives, in 2000 the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights issued what is known as 'General Comment 14' (hereinafter GC14), which sets out to clarify the 'normative content' (Section 6) of the right to the highest attainable standard of health. GC14 makes some useful observations, such as 'The right to health is not to be understood as a right to be healthy' (Section 8) for biological factors make it impossible to ensure everyone's health. Consequently some theorists may be tempted to retreat to the more modest right to medical care, which was mentioned in the UDHR. However, this is too narrow: the right to medical care was listed as only one of several determinants of health, alongside clean water and a safe environment, among other things. But perhaps just as importantly, supposing that the right to health can be restricted to the right to health care opens the way to some of the alleged practical difficulties that we will explore later. Thus we must conclude that the right to health lies somewhere between the right to be healthy and the right to health care. But where, exactly? Is it an agglomeration of rights to the determinants of health (but then how do we know which ones, as so many things can affect health?), or does it have a determinate conceptual core?

GC14 tries to address this gap. It sets out some very general guidelines. So, for example, it famously says that the right to health contains the elements of availability, accessibility, acceptability, and quality (Section 12) and expands on the particular examples given in ICESCR Article 12.2, such as 'the right to maternal, child and reproductive health'. There is no doubt that in reading through GC14 one can get a 'feel' for the idea of the human right to health, and the duties it generates, or at least correlates with. Nevertheless, one comes away from the General Comment with a suspicion that to some degree it has avoided the main question. And that question can be put like this: when is failure to supply medical care or other determinants of health nevertheless not a human rights failure?3 Human right to health litigation has, in the vast majority of cases, concerned the claim for medical treatment in the form of drugs, surgery or equipment that has not been supplied by the litigant's country.4 Presumably in almost

2 See Onora O'Neill, 'The Dark Side of Human Rights', *International Affairs*, 81 (2005): 427–39. Note, though, in many low resource settings the local elite achieve a level of health comparable to the global elite. Hence the locally highest attainable level is far higher than that commonly achieved. I owe this observation to Paula Braverman.

3 It could be said that this is a question not about the content of the human right to health, but the scope of the right. However, I take it that the two issues are very closely connected: generally the content will determine the scope. Arguably, though, GC14 provides a good account of the content of the human right to health, but leaves the scope indeterminate. Whichever way one puts the issue, the central and urgent question remains the same: when is a failure to provide health-improving services or resources nevertheless not a violation of the human right to health?

4 Alicia E. Yamin and Siri Gloppin, (eds.), *Litigating Health Rights* (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).

#### *Jonathan Wolff* 493

all cases there is a good chance that meeting the claim would have improved the litigant's health to some degree. But if courts are at least sometimes to turn down such suits then they need to have an answer to our question: when is it acceptable not to supply something that would be likely to improve health? If we were to take the idea of 'highest attainable standard of health' as our benchmark, then withholding anything that is clinically effective would be a violation. But in practice this would mean a huge diversion of resources to the health sector even when the health benefits, though real, are small. It is no wonder, then, that the right to health is often accused as being contrary to cost-effective health planning, or what Albert Weale calls 'beneficial design' of health systems.5

It is not the case that GC14 is entirely silent on the question of how to understand the idea of the 'highest attainable standard of health'. The authors well understood that in low resource settings there are severe limits to what is attainable. Indeed the document early on strikes a rather melancholy note: 'The Committee is aware that, for millions of people throughout the world, the full enjoyment of the right to health still remains a distant goal. Moreover, in many cases, especially for those living in poverty, this goal is becoming increasingly remote' (Section 5).

Clearly GC14 takes the plight of those living in poverty as a central concern. Rather than providing further analysis of the idea of the 'highest attainable standard' the document somewhat finesses the problem by implicitly suggesting that while, indeed, everyone does have a right to the highest attainable standard of health, it is not the case that all countries have the duty to supply their citizens with what would fulfil this right.6 We can see this in one of two ways. One would be to say that there is a gap between the right—which is to the highest attainable standard of health—and the duties it generates, which vary in the circumstances. This would be the most literal reading of the General Comment. Alternatively one could make a distinction between a fully fledged aspirational right to the highest attainable standard of health, and what we might call 'human rights in the circumstances', which again vary. Perhaps which route we go is a question of language, but the inescapable point is that whether or not individuals have the right to the highest attainable standard of health, GC14 does not assign to all countries the duty that all their citizens should achieve the highest attainable standard of health.

In order to deal with apparent non-compliance GC14 appeals to two important concepts: progressive realization (Sections 30–31) and core obligations (Sections 43–45). The idea of progressive realization is that it is unrealistic to expect poor countries to be able to offer the level of medical care and health protection available in wealthy countries, but it would be wrong to accuse them of violating the human rights of their people simply in virtue of this comparison. Hence it is vital to give countries a justification for not meeting the globally highest standard if their resources do not permit this. However this is not to be conceived of as a licence to neglect health. First,

<sup>5</sup> Albert Weale, 'The Right to Health Versus Good Medical Care?', *Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy*, 15 (2012): 473–93.

<sup>6</sup> The role of external state parties in GC14 is interesting. Several sections set out 'international obligations' (38–42), with special reference to the effect of the policies of international financial institutions, as well as humanitarian and disaster assistance and treatment of infectious disease, but it seems clear that the duties of external states are regarded as less demanding than the duties of the citizen's own state.

countries need to take 'deliberate, concrete and targeted [steps] towards the full realization of the right to health' (Section 30). And second, they nevertheless have certain 'core obligations' such as an obligation not to discriminate, and to supply a basic package of primary health services, as well as food, shelter, and essential drugs, and to adopt and implement a national public health strategy (Section 43), relying on international cooperation where necessary (Section 45).

We can see, then, that the task of setting out the content of the human right to health really comes down, now, to the issue of setting out an account of the duties of governments and other actors, whether national or international, in relation to health. And GC14 does this by way of setting out a list of duties, albeit at a certain level of abstraction. While sensible, indeed defensible, there remains something unsatisfactory about defining rights and duties by a list when hard cases will occur. The right to health is a protection against certain types of neglect, but, perhaps, not all.

How can we go further? GC14, as we noted, expands on details, yet without giving enough to know how to decide what is in and what is out. Yet there is a clue in the General Comment about how to develop the approach. In Section 33 we are told that the right to health, like all rights, entails a tri-partite structure of duties: duties to respect, protect, and fulfil. It has been argued that the source of this account of duties is, in fact, Henry Shue's book *Basic Rights*, as modified by others.7 As a way of overcoming what he regarded as a misleading and simplistic division of rights into 'negative' requiring duties of non-intervention, and 'positive' requiring duties of active assistance, Shue pointed out that the rights he was interested in—to liberty, security, and subsistence—generate duties to 'avoid' certain types of behaviour, to 'protect' individuals from violations by others, and to 'aid' some individuals in achieving their rights.8 These duties do not have to be held by the same party, although often they will be. Even 'negative' rights, such as the right to security, require positive action by governments, such as the provision of a police force. Shue's insight has been generalized to all human rights by the United Nations, and therefore, has had extraordinary influence in the development of United Nations human rights doctrine over the whole range of rights.

My thought is that there is more to learn from Shue than has been taken up by the United Nations so far. For the problem we are considering in relation to the right to health is simply a more explicitly formulated problem that afflicts all human rights doctrine. Shue himself is concerned with the 'basic' human rights to liberty, security, and subsistence. To see the problem let us take one of Shue's basic rights: the right to security. Suppose I am attacked on my way home from work. Can I say that the government has in some manner failed in relation to my human right to security?

Now, there are some cases in which such an attack could be conceived as a violation of a human right to security. For example, if it were the government itself that organized the attack. Here the government would have clearly failed in its duty to respect my right to security and much else. Or if the police knew it was going to happen but did not try to prevent it, because they don't like me or people of my kind. Obviously the duty to protect would have been breached. Or if such things happen on a very regular

<sup>7</sup> D.E. Reeve, *Global Poverty, Human Rights and Development*, PhD Thesis, University College London, 2013.

<sup>8</sup> Henry Shue, *Basic Rights*, 2nd edn (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996), 51–5.

#### *Jonathan Wolff* 495

basis and the police and other government authorities have not helped to reduce their incidence by means that they have at their disposal. Here the government would have failed in its duty to fulfil. Yet a one-off, unpredictable attack by another private citizen, although a violation of my individual rights, could not generally be construed as a failure by the government to secure my human right to security.9 As Shue remarks, he is 'not suggesting the absurd standard that a right has been fulfilled only if it is impossible for anyone to be deprived of it or only if no one is ever deprived of it. The standard can only be some reasonable level of guarantee'.10

But what is a reasonable level? Naturally it would be too much to expect a formula. Yet Shue does provide us with some important insight, and it is this I would like to try to develop. Human rights, he says, require social guarantees against 'standard threats'. This immediately provides some clarification. The government cannot be expected to protect us against everything. Standard, here, contrasts with 'exotic', and, perhaps 'rare' and 'new'; although all of these ideas need to be treated with caution, as an exotic, rare, and new threat can very easily become mundane, common, and familiar.

Shue's own analysis of the idea of a standard threat is that it must be 'ordinary,11 and serious, but remediable'.12 This, perhaps draws together different ideas: the ordinary nature of a threat makes it standard; the serious nature makes it worthy of attention; but only if it remediable is the failure to remedy it a breach of human rights (although the failure to research how to remedy a non-remediable ordinary and serious threat could be a human rights failure, which is especially important in the area of health).

Each of these terms—ordinary, serious, and remediable—are context dependent. Shue himself notes 'Precisely what those [typical major] threats are, and which it is feasible to counter, are of course largely empirical questions, and the answers to both questions will change as the situation changes'.13 So, for example, Shue notes that what is eradicable changes over time. 'Today, we have very little excuse for allowing so many poor people to die of malaria and more excuse probably for allowing people to die of cancer. Later perhaps we will have equally little excuse to allow deaths by many kinds of cancer, or perhaps not'.14

The example of variability over time that Shue points to is a difficulty only on a very pedantic understanding of human rights. Human rights, it is generally thought, are universal, but, so the criticism runs, if they are variable over time how can they be universal? One response to this problem is to point out that the required universality is 'synchronic universality' (Raz, this volume, chapter 12). It may well be that some human rights are universal through time, but the general claim is that if one person

9 Note that I am not arguing that one-off, unpredictable events can never be a violation of a person's human rights. As Matthew Liao pointed out to me, the *Fritzl* case in Austria, where Joseph Fritzl kept his daughter Elizabeth imprisoned and subject to sexual abuse for over twenty years, is clearly a violation of her human rights. However my claim is that the Austrian government's failure to protect Elizabeth Fritzl from her father is not a human rights failing by the government. If, however, such imprisonments started to become more common (eg as kidnappings have become in some countries) and the government did not take steps to try to protect its population then it is much more likely that the government's failure to protect is a human rights failure.

10 Shue, *Basic Rights*, 17.

11 Sometimes Shue uses the terms 'common' (32) or 'predictable' (33) or 'typical' (33) or 'pervasive' (fn 191) in place of 'ordinary'.

12 Shue, *Basic Rights*, 32. 13 Shue, *Basic Rights*, 33. 14 Shue, *Basic Rights*, 33.

has a human right then, generally speaking, all people currently alive have the same rights, if they are in a position to benefit from them (for example men cannot have rights to a particular type of maternal care).

However, a more troubling variability—and an apparent denial of synchronic universality15—enters in through the other two parts of the idea of a standard threat: 'common' and 'serious'. Shue addresses this only in a footnote, stating 'Although this admission opens a theoretical door to a certain amount of "relativism", I suspect the actual differences across societies to the standard preventable threats are much less than they conceivably might be. Compare Barrington Moore's thesis that although differences in conceptions of happiness are great and important, virtually everyone agrees upon the "miseries" ' (fn 190). Note, though, that even if Barrington Moore is correct this would mean only that empirically there is little variation on what is to count as serious. And 'little variation' is not the same as 'no variation'; it seems sufficient to refute synchronic universality.

Even worse is the variability of what is common. And in the field of health, on an ordinary understanding of the word 'common', there is huge variability in common threats to health in different parts of the world. The global pattern of infectious diseases, contrasted with the pattern of non-infectious 'life-style' diseases makes this point plain, even if it is true that conditions such as diabetes and lung cancer are becoming more prevalent in the developing world.

For such reasons, Beitz and Goodin remark:16

The idea of rights only protecting against 'standard threats' is difficult to state precisely—more so, perhaps, than Shue himself may recognize. Still, as a start, we might say that 'standard threats' are those 'ordinary and serious but remediable' potential interferences that can reasonably be expected to arise in the normal circumstances of human social life . . . .The significance of this is to register a kind of non-arbitrary variability within the concept of a basic right: what counts as an 'ordinary and serious' potential interference to any particular type of action may be different in one society or at one historical moment rather than another. As a result, basic rights may have different institutional requirements in different social contexts.

In the light of these comments, it does seem possible to save synchronic universality as long as the content of the right is specified in very general terms: a right to be protected against common, serious, and remediable threats, where it is accepted that what is common and serious differs from place to place, and what is to count as remediable must also take resource constraints into account.17

Shue's account, then, has the advantage of moderating the human right to health so that it does not generate impossible duties in difficult times, and thus is consonant with the approach in GC14, providing the much needed theoretical unity to the

<sup>15</sup> Raz notes that cultural variability in health conflicts with synchronic universality. He does not appear to say how this is to be dealt with (this volume, ch. 12, 230).

<sup>16</sup> Charles Beitz and Robert Goodin, 'Introduction: *Basic Rights* and Beyond', in Beitz and Goodin (eds.), *Global Basic Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 10.

<sup>17</sup> For a similar distinction, framed as the distinction between the 'aim' and the 'object' of a right, see S. Matthew Liao and Adam Etinson, 'Political and Naturalistic Conceptions of Human Rights: A False Premise?', *Journal of Moral Philosophy*, 9(3) (2012): 327-52. See too Liao, this volume, ch. 3.

account. Indeed, Shue's position has a further advantage, which also picks out a major theme in GC14. Noting that human rights protect against standard threats suggests that a government's duty will, in the first instance, be a duty to create effective institutions to provide a reasonable guarantee of a reasonable level.18 Sometimes a reasonable level is an absolute level—consider the example of torture—but this is not universally so. The main point is that human rights, so understood, generally in the first instance call on the government to put effective institutions in place—rather like a Rawlsian basic structure—rather than to meet the particular needs of particular individuals.19 Of course where there is institutional failure individuals may well pursue their own complaints, and one such failure may be where a government in its actions has failed to *respect* an individual's rights, by, for example, engaging in violent or arbitrary acts against an individual. But where a government has failed to *protect* individuals against threats, or to *fulfil* a right, an individual claim should have something of the character of a test case or implicit class action. That is, in the general case the suit should only succeed if it is an example of something that happens on a larger scale, and the government ought, by way of remedy, to change its practices rather than (or in addition to) providing individual compensation. What this means in relation to health, it seems, is that failure to protect and, especially, fulfil should primarily be *condition-based* (or non-condition group based, such as ethnicity) rather than *person-based*. (Failure to respect, in contrast, could easily take any form.)

However, when we turn to human rights practice as it takes place in the law courts of the world (as distinct, perhaps, from more general human rights activism), we see very many individual cases being brought, for people seeking particular treatments, which apparently cuts against the point I have derived from Shue's argument that fulfilling human rights duties generally requires institutional change rather than individual action. This leads us to the practical difficulty. Even if we can satisfy ourselves that the conceptual difficulties can be met, in practice the human right to health leads to very unsatisfactory legal judgments that disrupt efficient planning in the health sector.

Consider the following remarks from Albert Weale:20

A good example of the untoward possibilities of constitutionalizing a right to health is provided by Rueda's (2010) account of the changing jurisprudence of the Colombian Constitutional Court during the 1990s. The 1991 constitution had strengthened the mechanisms of judicial review and created a writ for the protection of fundamental constitutional rights known as the tutela. According to Rueda's analysis, this resulted in a 'top-down' extension of social rights to the poor and the marginalized deriving from the Court's use of the concept of minimo vital between 1992 and 1998. However, when economic crisis hit Colombia in the late 1990s, the middle classes were able to use those same legal powers to protect their economic and social rights, including the right to healthcare in a way that the poor were not. The constitutional

<sup>18</sup> Shue, *Basic Rights*, 17.

<sup>19</sup> This is not to say that the government will never have the duty in the first instance to protect individuals: in cases of emergency and rescue then, as Matthew Liao pointed out to me, the government should help individuals before putting protective institutions in place. But of course emergencies remain the exception.

<sup>20</sup> Weale, 'The Right to Health Versus Good Medical Care?', 475.

provisions thus worked as a device for maintaining social inequalities and economic privileges, not ending them. The example illustrates how in practice the language of rights may be deployed by different groups of actors for politically incompatible ends.

Similar comments could be made about Brazil and other South and Central American countries, and an impressive amount of scholarship now exists regarding health right litigation.21 While some are celebrating the development of worldwide right to health litigation, others look on in horror as it turns the courts into arbitrary or biased health resource priority setting mechanisms, and thus distorts rational health planning (which is especially ironic as designing and implementing a health plan is a human right to health obligation on governments).

Yet we need to treat these examples with caution. At the present time it is not possible to bring a case under the ICESCR, and it will not be possible to do so until the Optional Protocol of the Covenant has been ratified, which may still be some way off. Hence the cases discussed by Weale and others are *constitutional right to health* cases, as distinct from *human right to health* cases. Even if it is true, as has been claimed, that domestic courts refer to the international human rights instruments,22 it should not be taken for granted that the courts are authentic or definitive interpreters of what the human right to health demands. Indeed, when appropriated in constitutional law, the right to health may well serve a subtly different purpose than it does in international law.

What, then, is the difference between a human right and a constitutional right? My understanding of human rights relies on two main ideas, from Charles Beitz and Joseph Raz. Beitz suggests that the institutionalization of human rights is a response to a defect in the world system which has left each individual under the authority of a particular state, and hence liable to the exercise of arbitrary power: power that even a constitution may not be able to check.23 Recall that the drafting of the UDHR took place in the shadow of Nazi Germany. If a government persecutes its citizens, or treats them in certain other ways (something we will return to) those citizens should have the opportunity to turn to the world community for support. Raz makes the point by suggesting that human rights seek to protect interests that are so fundamental that a government's failure to respect, protect or fulfil is a matter for concern for the society of states, to which it must be held accountable. Where a human right is concerned a state cannot claim that whether it observes a particular duty to its citizens is a matter of state sovereignty and thus the business of no other country. Human rights trump the 'none of your business' response.24 This is not to say that human rights are entirely constituted, or defined by, their role in international law, but rather that they pick up on a set of individual rights that are so important that, at the least, they place limits on state sovereignty.

- 23 Charles Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).
<sup>21</sup> Yamin and Gloppin, *Litigating Health Rights*.

<sup>22</sup> Yamin and Gloppin, *Litigating Health Rights*, 5.

<sup>24</sup> Joseph Raz, 'Human Rights without Foundation', in Samantha Besson and John Tasiolous (eds.), *The Philosophy of International Law* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010).

What, then, is a constitutional right? A conventional understanding is that it protects individuals against 'the tyranny of the majority'. To put the point parallel to the Beitz/Raz reflections upon human rights, a constitutional right is presumably a right so fundamental that no incumbent government should be permitted to change it at least without going to a great deal of trouble. (This is a 'mark' of a constitutional right rather than a definition that somehow reveals its essence.) The purpose of a constitutional right, presumably, is to protect individuals from the vagaries of party politics in the form of political expediency, populism, and arbitrary spending cuts, as well as the tyranny of the majority. Critically, then, the purpose of constitutional rights is not the same as human rights, and it is quite possible that human rights will be less demanding than constitutional rights.

The right to health cases that Weale mentions, and others have discussed and documented in great detail, seem to me to raise serious problems for the way the constitutional right to heath has played out in some countries. Yet from the contents of this chapter, it should be clear that their bearing on the human right to health requires further consideration. For is it obvious that the sorts of issues that have come up in the courts are always the sorts of things that are serious enough to allow one country to take a legitimate interest in the internal affairs of another? In at least one class of cases the Colombian courts have indeed called for institutional reform, which fits well with Shue's analysis.25 Yet in other cases 'The Court has also approved. . .post-mastectomy breast implants [and] the provision of growth hormones'.26 Undeniably important as these concerns are, and perhaps worthy of inclusion as constitutional rights, depending on the history, traditions, and resources of the country, it is hard to see the case for making these issues human rights: is the threat to health so serious as to make it a matter of international concern? Raising these questions helps us address one of the issues left hanging by Shue's analysis of 'standard threats': how serious is 'serious'? One answer, albeit not a complete solution, is that it must be serious enough that its neglect should be a matter of concern for the international community.

To make further progress it will be helpful to think through the ways in which a state may fail to meet its responsibilities. Or to put in another way, inspired by Beitz's thinking, if part of the point of human rights is to protect us from the misfortune of being born into a territory run by the 'wrong kind' of state, what do we mean by 'wrong kind'? Although there are many ways in which one may classify moral failures by government, it may be helpful to contrast:

- 1. Those states that victimize a group within their territory, normally an unpopular minority (unjust states).
- 2. Those that are institutionally too weak to act effectively (incompetent states).
- 3. Those that lack the resources to act effectively (impoverished states).

<sup>25</sup> Alicia E. Yamin, O. Parra-Vera, and C. Gianella, 'Colombia: Judicial Protection of the Right to Health: An Elusive Promise?, in Alicia E. Yamin and Siri Gloppin (eds.), *Litigating Health Rights* (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).

<sup>26</sup> Yamin et al., 'Colombia: Judicial Protection of the Right to Health', 111.

- 4. Those that have the capacity to act effectively but use it to the advantage of those who rule (corrupt states).
- 5. Those where the national interest is pursued to the neglect and detriment of some of its citizens (reckless states).

Of course a given state may fail in several ways, and it may not always be possible to put a failure in a particular category, but each of these failures gives rise to possible human rights abuses, and also to possible human right to health failures.

Reading GC14 in the light of these distinctions is a useful exercise, although what I say will be illustrative rather than exhaustive. Where a state is unjust, it is very likely that there will be numerous violations regarding the unpopular or minority group that it neglects or persecutes. This may include other forms of discrimination, such as access to law, and treatment with respect to welfare services and within the criminal justice system. In relation to health the many references in GC14 to the importance of non-discrimination (Sections 3, 12(b), 12(c), 19, 20–27, 34, 35) and perhaps the right to be free from torture and non-consensual medical treatment and experimentation (Section 8) could fall under this head, as well as under several others. Reference to gender difference (Section 10) picks up on injustice, whether 'overt' or not, to use the language of Section 19. Section 12(b) lists a range of groups that could suffer discrimination including older people and people with disabilities, as well as ethnic minorities. Some of these violations will be violations of the duty to respect (Section 50) such as 'the denial of access to health facilities, goods and services, to particular individuals as a result of de jure or de facto discrimination.' But failure of duties to protect, for example failing to protect women against violence (Section 51) are also possible, as well as failures to fulfil by discriminatory allocation practices (Section 52).

To take another example, recklessness (in the sense of pursuing national interests to the detriment of people) may be covered by references to such things as the duty to provide 'healthy occupational and environmental conditions' (Section 11) which could easily be neglected by a rapidly developing country. The prevention of exposure to radiation and harmful chemicals is mentioned in Section 15, which could be relevant at all levels of development, as could the degree to which other rights can be limited for the sake of public health, which is discussed in Sections 28 and 29, guarding against over-intrusive or disproportionate limitations on individual freedoms. Recklessness can include failures to respect, for example 'the failure of the State to take into account its legal obligations regarding the right to health when entering into bilateral or multilateral agreements with other States, international organizations and other entities' (Section 50) or 'the failure to enact or enforce laws to prevent the pollution of water, air and soil by extractive and manufacturing industries' (Section 51).

The check on what I have called 'incompetence' in the General Comment is, it seems, reflected through several mentions of 'the adoption and implementation [of] a national public health strategy and plan of action'. A state that fails to set out a plan, as well as neglecting the health of its citizens, is in deep violation. Planning is a test of competence, and a failure to plan will, presumably, be a matter of international concern. Distinctly, as Section 47 recognizes, it is possible for a state to be willing, but unable to fulfil its obligations through what I referred to as impoverishment. It may

have a plan but be very limited in its ability to carry it out. Here considerations about progressive realization enter in, as discussed earlier.

Where does this leave us with the question of whether the human right to health comes into conflict with rational design and planning? GC14's emphasis on planning would superficially suggest the two things should be complementary, but of course the challenge comes not from the incompatibility with the treatises, but litigation. I have suggested that in several cases there is a good argument that a constitutional right to health can lead to distortions in health care allocation. But I want to emphasize that this alone does not make the case against the human right to health.

Indeed, although the human right to health mandates high levels of vigilance in the duty to respect and protect, in the case of the duty to fulfil it is arguable that the human right to health requires a level of provision below that currently offered in many wealthy societies: ie, in many cases wealthy countries presently exceed many of their human right to health obligations. Consequently, although there are always difficulties in withdrawing benefits, it may not be a violation of the human right to health to withdraw some medical services from the standard package offered to all citizens in a country (as we have seen with dental services, for example, in the United Kingdom). The argument for this is derived from reflection on the purpose of human rights and the further consequences of such a purpose in the realm of health. In this respect it is unfortunate that the drafters used the phrase 'the highest attainable standard of health': the language of 'fully adequate' may well have been better.

In conclusion, I have addressed two problems that turn out to be closely related: how to understand the conceptual core of the human right to health; and the practical limits of that right in terms of the health-related services it does not or should not cover especially in relation to cases pursued in constitutional courts around the world. The paper takes the purpose of human rights as central, combining ideas from Beitz (human rights are needed because of a defect in the world structure which would otherwise leave individuals at the mercy of the state that governs the territory in which they happen to live); from Raz (that human rights give, or at least mark, a licence for one state to express concerns about what is happening within the borders of another); and from Shue (that rights provide social guarantees against common, serious, and remediable threats). The link is provided through understanding that serious threats are those that give one state a licence to take an interest in the affairs of another. Not everything pursued in constitutional courts has such a high level of seriousness. Hence on this understanding we cannot assume that all constitutionally protected rights are human rights, strictly understood, and hence criticisms of what happens within a particular national court system cannot be assumed automatically to apply to the human right to health. The conceptual core and practical implications of the human right to health are, in combination, clarified.27

<sup>27</sup> My thanks to Matthew Liao for very helpful comments on the penultimate draft of this paper.