---
title: "The Relativity and Ethnocentricity of Human Rights"
author:
  - name: "James Griffin"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "555–569"
citation_key: "griffin2015relativity"
---

## [PART IV](#page-8-17) [HUMAN RIGHTS: CONCER NS A N D](#page-8-17)  [ALTERNATIVES](#page-8-17)

## <span id="page-569-0"></span> [The Relativity and Ethnocentricity of Human Rights*](#page-8-18)

#### *James Griffin*

## **I. Ethical Relativity**

Ethical relativism, as I shall understand it, makes two claims: first, that ethical judgements are made within a framework of basic evaluations, which may take the form of beliefs, preferences, sentiments, and so on; and, second, that there are divergent frameworks for judgements on the same matter, no one framework being most authoritative.1 We can then specify the framework further case by case—the basic evaluations of individual persons, of social groups, of cultures, and so on.

Ethical relativism, as most commonly expressed, is universal: *all* ethical judgements are relative to a framework. Its contradictory is therefore particular negative: some are not. I have already argued2 that some ethical judgements—namely, judgements about basic human interests—are objective, where 'objective' means dependent not upon a person's subjective states but upon considerations that would lead all successfully rational persons to the same conclusion. So universal ethical relativism is, I conclude, false. But philosophers tend to treat values as if they were uniform: all are objective, or none is; all are a matter of knowledge, or none is; all are relative to a framework, or none is. But I have also questioned this assumption of uniformity.3 Some complex moral norms, such as 'Don't deliberately kill the innocent', have an element of policy to them, and so lack empirical truth-value, whereas the judgements that a particular human interest is or is not met have one.

Relativism need not take a universal form. Consider relativity to the evaluative framework of individuals, based on their different desires and sentiments. Value beliefs can be subjected to criticism by facts4 and by logic.5 Many ethical beliefs are shaped by a person's understanding, often misunderstanding, of the empirical world: of the consequences of our acts, of what the objects of our desires are really like, and so on. Once one's desires and attitudes have been corrected, one may come to change them; over time they may increasingly converge with the desires and attitudes of others. What a relativist must maintain, however, is that some divergent beliefs will remain, and

<sup>*</sup> This chapter first appeared in James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).

<sup>1</sup> I have already said something about ethical relativism in discussing John Rawls' views about ethnocentrism, see Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 1.5.

<sup>2</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, ch. 6 3 Griffin, *On Human Rights*, ch. 6.

<sup>4</sup> See David Hume, 'Of the Standard of Taste', in various collections of his essays.

<sup>5</sup> See Richard Brandt, *A Theory of the Good and the Right* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979), 10.

remain for the reasons relativists give. In any case, our interest here is human rights. Are *they* relative to a framework?

How can one make a case for ethical relativism? The commonest way is to cite, with little in the way of argument, certain examples of particularly stubborn ethical disagreement, which are meant to leave one thinking that the best explanation of the disagreement is the relativist's. This is, of course, an extremely weak form of argument. Establishing the best explanation of stubborn ethical disagreements requires understanding all the possible origins of these conflicting beliefs and all the possible resources that might resolve the conflict—no quick or easy job. That the job is so difficult leaves many relativists, despite its inadequacy, doing no more than citing examples. Let me give a brief sampler of the examples that they have offered.

Some societies regard theft as a serious crime; others do not even have the concept of private property, on which the idea of 'theft' depends.6 It is hardly obvious that relativism provides the best explanation of this difference. If one lives where food is plentiful without cultivation, there may be no pressure to develop an institution of private property. But if one's survival depends upon clearing land and shouldering the burdens of growing one's own food, some form of control over the land and the crop is highly likely to emerge. The best explanation may be difference not in ethical framework but in material conditions.

Some societies have tolerated infanticide; others condemn it.7 But consider the extreme case of life-threatening poverty. Tolerance of infanticide is an adaptation that most of us would make if forced to it by the direst poverty: say, if one were faced with the awful choice between the survival of one's newborn baby or one's young child. A plausible explanation of the disagreement over infanticide between a society of such abject poverty and one better off may not be a difference in evaluative frameworks but, again, a difference in material conditions.

Many people are committed to preserving the environment; others see no objection to exploiting it.8 This is a conflict that does indeed look irresolvable. To my mind, we can coherently talk about the value of the environment not just when changes in the environment affect human beings, say our health or enjoyment, but also apart from any effect on sentient life. The environment has a value in itself. The idea of the environment's being intrinsically valuable rests, I believe, on an idea of appropriateness of attitude. The only appropriate response to, say, the enormous age, biological complexity, and beauty of the Great Barrier Reef is wonder and awe. And wonder and awe prompt respect. There is something lacking in a person who does not have some such response. The wanton destruction of the Great Barrier Reef would be a monstrous act. Ethics, I should say, is broad enough to encompass standards not just of *right* and *wrong* but also of *appropriate* and *inappropriate*. Now, if the natives on an island in the Great Barrier Reef decide to improve their quality of life by mining, and

<sup>6</sup> This is one of Gilbert Harman's examples of relativity to an ethical framework; see his 'Moral Relativism', in Gilbert Harman and Judith Jarvis Thomson, *Moral Relativism and Moral Objectivity* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996), 9.

<sup>7</sup> Also Gilbert Harman's example: Harman and Thomson, *Moral Relativism and Moral Objectivity*, 8–9.

<sup>8</sup> For the citation of incommensurable values as an example of moral relativity, see Maria Baghramian, *Relativism* (London: Routledge, 2004), ch. 9.

thereby destroying, the Reef, the apparent rational resolution of the conflict between the preservationists and the exploiters would be to weigh the costs and benefits to sentient creatures against the intrinsic value of the Reef. But that, I suspect, is a piece of weighing we cannot do. We must remember that some values may be incommensurable, in this sense of the term: two values are incommensurable if and only if they cannot be ranked against one another as 'greater than', 'less than', 'equal to', or 'roughly equal to'.9 For a pair of values to be commensurable in this sense, there must be a bridging notion in terms of which the comparison between them can be made. For example, most, perhaps all, human interests, I should say, lend themselves to comparison. They do, not because there is a substantive super-value behind them, but because there is a formal value notion in terms of which we can, and regularly do, compare them: for example, 'prudential value', 'quality of life', or 'human interest' itself. We thus have the conceptual materials to judge that 'this would enhance the quality of my life more than that', 'this is a more major human interest than that', and so on. But sometimes—not often, I believe—two competing values are so different in nature from one another that there is no bridging notion available. In this conflict over the environment, for example, there is no bridging notion; comparison breaks down. This is indeed an intractable difference, but it does not derive from difference in ethical framework but from incommensurably different values. There is even a possible resolution of this disagreement: bringing both parties to see that the values they purport to commensurate are incommensurable.

A last example. Many of us think that abortion is prohibited; many others think that it is permitted.10 Most often a person who holds that abortion is forbidden also holds background religious beliefs. But then is this, after all, an example of ethical relativity? Virtually all of us would accept that abortion is prohibited if we believed that an all-good, all-wise God had told us so. But with such a background, this intractable disagreement seems to have arisen not from different ethical frameworks but from different metaphysical beliefs. Perhaps, though, this just means that we should reconsider our definition of ethical relativism as relativity to a framework of basic *evaluations*. Evaluations cannot be sharply divided from empirical and metaphysical beliefs; our basic evaluations are what they are in part because of non-ethical beliefs. But if this truth is to support the relativity of a belief about the morality of abortion, it must be because of the further relativity of facts or of metaphysical conceptual schemes. Ethical relativity would then not stand alone. Although these further relativities seem much shakier than ethical relativity, perhaps that impression is mistaken.

Still, not all ethical disagreements about abortion arise from differences over religion. When they do not, what best explains the stubbornness of the divergence? No doubt, many different things. But one explanation that is hard to make plausible is that there are two different frameworks of fairly well-articulated and well-defined ethical

<sup>9</sup> For fuller treatment, see James Griffin, 'Mixing Values', *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society*, suppl. vol. 65 (1991): 101–18; and James Griffin, 'Incommensurability: What's the Problem?', in Ruth Chang (ed.), *Incommensurability, Incomparability, and Practical Reason* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997), 35–51.

<sup>10</sup> David B. Wong offers this as an example of what he would regard as ethical relativism; see his *Moral Relativity* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), ch. 12, section 5.

beliefs producing this disagreement. That would make thought at this level far clearer and more inferential than it is. What might these ethical beliefs be? Nor is it plausible that these divergent beliefs about abortion are themselves basic ethical beliefs. They do not have quite that depth; they need justification themselves. What is more plausible, I should say, is that the framework for each of these conflicting views is a complex mix of ethical beliefs, factual beliefs, and sentiments. They might be beliefs such as 'A foetus is already a fully biologically formed potential person, as much so as a new-born baby' or 'An early foetus is too biologically primitive to be a person'. Or they might be sentiments such as revulsion at the very thought of killing a foetus or, on the contrary, equanimity in the face of it. But these beliefs are vague, and their implications for action by no means clear. And we should have to decide what weight to attach to these sentiments of revulsion or equanimity. What authority do they have?

My discussion of each of the four examples I have given is, I admit, inconclusive neither decisively for nor against their relativity. But that is my point. One would have to dig much deeper before one could reach a satisfactory conclusion. Merely citing an example is no case at all. Let me now try to dig somewhat deeper in the example that primarily concerns us: human rights.

### **II. The Relativity of Human Rights**

Human rights are suspected—by Westerners as much as by Easterners—of being relative to Western culture. Human rights are undoubtedly a Western product: introduced by Christians in the late Middle Ages and further developed there in the early modern period and in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.11 They were part of the growth in individualism in that particular time and place; they were part of a new sense in Europe and the Americas of 'the dignity of man' and the great value of human autonomy and liberty.

But why think that human rights are, as well as a product of the West, also relative to the values of the West? One argument might be that the values from which human rights are derived—most prominently autonomy and liberty—are themselves peculiarly Western values. Some societies, it is true, value autonomy highly, seeing in it the peculiar dignity of the human person, while other societies value autonomy much less, seeing in it the threat of social atomism and the loss of solidarity and fraternity and of the harmony that comes from our all serving the same values. But anyone who thinks seriously about the value of our status as normative agents and the benefits of living in a cohesive fraternal community will recognize that both are highly important. And they will recognize the same about both others' having to respect our individuality and our having duties of concern and care for others. It may be that realizing certain of the values of individualism is incompatible with realizing certain of the values of community. But incompatibility of values is not their relativity. Besides, the frequency of the incompatibility is exaggerated. Not all forms of autonomy are the autonomy to which we attach great value.12 I would display more autonomy, in one

11 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, sections 1.1 and 2.2.

12 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, sections 8.2 and 8.3.

correct use of the word, if I calculated my own income tax each year and decided for myself the plausibility of the Big Bang, instead of relying on the expertise of others. But neither of those is the autonomy to which we attach great value. What we attach great value to is the autonomy that is a constituent of normative agency, and relying on a tax accountant or an astrophysicist does not derogate in the least from one's normative agency. And the form of solidarity to which we attach such great value does not require surrendering our normative agency, though it may require greater trust in one another and greater convergence in public standards. The form of solidarity that is of great value is a joint commitment to the members of one's community and to the community's successful working. The plausible explanation of the fact that different societies rank autonomy and solidarity differently is not that they are rankings of the relativist sort. Everyone, on pain of mistake, has to admit that autonomy and solidarity are both highly valuable. No one would maintain that any loss in autonomy is worse than any loss in solidarity, or vice versa. And the more specific a choice between the two becomes—a certain loss of autonomy, say, to achieve a certain gain in solidarity—the more convergence in choice one will expect there to be. We do seem able, if only roughly, to compare these competing values.

A second argument for the relativity of human rights—indeed, an argument arising from my own account—is this. We have seen how certain moral judgements—for example, 'That's cruel'—could be derived from judgements about human interests for example, 'That's painful'.13

The judgement 'That's cruel' goes so little beyond claims about pain, cause, and intention that it inherits the metaphysical and epistemic standing they have—standing as natural facts, I proposed. This suggests—merely suggests—that a human right (a moral standard) might similarly be derived from a certain human interest (a prudential value), again inheriting from it a sort of objectivity that would defeat the claim of relativity. Take the derivation of autonomy (the human right) from autonomy (the prudential value). But I also admitted that the derivation of still other human rights from human interests was less simple—for example, the right to life, which has an element of policy to it. The norm 'Don't deliberately kill the innocent', which is one of the correlative duties of the right to life, in part expresses a policy, and different societies might adopt different policies. Some human rights thus have a clear conventional element. Do they thereby have an element of relativity?

Take the right to autonomy. Once one recognizes the value of autonomy, one recognizes also a reason to be autonomous oneself and a reason not to deny other people their autonomy. Human rights are protections of one's personhood, and so protections of, among other things, one's capacity for and exercise of autonomy. Is the objective epistemic status of the judgement that autonomy is prudentially valuable transferred to the judgement that autonomy is a human right? We should ask: What more comes into the second judgement than is already present in the first? The obvious answer is: the first is a prudential judgement, the second a moral judgement. I find it very hard to understand the nature of the transition from prudence to morality, but, despite my uncertainty, I think that at least there is a kind of rationality to it. It is tempting

13 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 6.4.

to treat the reason-generating consideration that moves me when my autonomy is at stake as different from the one that moves me when yours is at stake. The obvious difference between these two cases is that in the one it is *my* autonomy, and in the other it is *yours*. But the most plausible understanding of the engine of these two judgements is *autonomy: because a person's quality of life is importantly at stake*. The *my* and *your* are not part of the reason-generating consideration. The clause *because a person's quality of life is importantly at stake* lacks reference to me or to you, but it lacks nothing of what we understand the reason to be. To try to deny 'autonomy' its status as a reason for action unless it is attached to 'my' would mean giving up our grasp on how 'autonomy' works as a reason for action.

Return now to my question: What more is present in the second judgement than is already contained in the first? There is, of course, whatever is added by calling autonomy a 'human right'. Many philosophers say that the judgement that something is a human right carries with it a claim that it has a particular moral importance: for example, it has the status of a 'trump' or a 'side-constraint'. But I have already argued several times against this characterization of human rights. They are neither trumps nor side constraints. They are not even the most important of rights. Autonomy—or, more generally, personhood—is not necessarily the most important human interest. Human rights make only an overrideable claim that a person's autonomy be given due respect—that is, the respect due to the sort of autonomy at stake in any particular case. And that much follows simply from autonomy's being a prudential value. It is true that to know that autonomy is a prudential value is also to know how valuable it is: that it is generally highly valuable to us, valuable enough to attract, as it has, special protection, but of varying value from case to case, and overrideable by other important values.

When I speak here of the 'derivation' of the human right to autonomy, I do not mean an entailment. I mean only that a reasonable person who recognizes the prudential value of autonomy will also recognize the respect that it is due. And the reasonableness of that transition is enough to deny a relativist a foothold here.

Another important qualification. The transition from prudence to morality is, of course, too complicated a matter to be dealt with as briskly as I have just done—so complicated that there is no point in my embarking on a few more brisk comments. I have discussed the subject more fully elsewhere, and will fall back on that.14 So let me leave my brief sketch of the kind of rationality involved in the transition from prudence to morality as a kind of marker: I need a fuller argument at this point, but so too would a relativist who wants to resist the objective tendency of my line of thought.

Let me turn to the second example I mentioned: the human right to life. Does a relativist find a foothold at least here? There is, I said, an element of policy in this right. Such policies are, it is true, social artefacts. All that we can say, though, is that a different society might choose a *somewhat* different policy. There are strong constraints on the policies that can be chosen. The non-arbitrary determinants of the content of the policy are the prudential value of human life, facts about human nature, and facts about how societies work. The great value of life would lead nearly all societies to adopt severe restrictions on deliberately taking an innocent person's life, the severity

14 James Griffin, *Value Judgement: Improving Our Ethical Beliefs* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996), ch. V.

manifesting itself in reluctance to recognize many exceptions, especially, given what people are like, exceptions that cannot themselves be clearly enough limited or that have to rely on agent's being capable of highly subtle distinctions. Some societies may, even so, turn out to be relatively liberal about the restrictions, while others are relatively conservative. But that fact offers no appreciable support for relativity. If the convention adopted by one society could be seen to be working rather better than the convention of another, then there is strong rational ground for the second to adopt the convention of the first. If, as is common, we cannot tell whether any one convention is working better than the others, then no society would have good reason to resist an obvious solution to the divergence: agreement on a common convention. This sort of difference between societies represents not a different framework of basic evaluations but merely a highly constrained difference in a rational opting.

What may we conclude? I have carried my discussion both of the metaphysics of human rights and of their relativity only so far. I have not argued for the reality of prudential values, but only for their factuality: judgements about human interests, I concluded, can be true or false in the way that judgements about an ointment's being soothing can be. Here, I want to conclude that judgements about human interests and about human rights do not offer appreciably more scope for relativism than do judgements about natural facts. But I have already acknowledged15 that one can be a relativist about natural facts—for example, the sort of comprehensive relativism that Wittgenstein is sometimes thought to hold: relativity to a form of life. The assessment of this radical form of relativism I again leave to others.16

## **III. What is the Problem of Ethnocentricity?**

There are those who maintain that, even if ethical relativism were false, the problem of ethnocentricity would remain.17

What exactly *is* the problem of ethnocentricity? Perhaps it is this.18 Human rights are, or are widely held to be, universally applicable. But if the only available justification for them is in Western terms, then they are not universally authoritative. If this were the problem, it would be overcome by establishing an objective justification of human rights authoritative for all rational beings. An objective justification of this sort would be sufficient, but perhaps not necessary. Certain forms of intersubjective justification might also do.

Still, if such an objective or intersubjective justification were forthcoming, a problem of ethnocentricity might even then remain. Such justification may be a long way

<sup>15</sup> See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 6.3.

<sup>16</sup> For a good recent assessment see Paul Boghossian, *Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and Constructivism* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).

<sup>17</sup> For Rawls on the need to avoid ethnocentrism, see his *The Law of Peoples* (hereinafter *LP*) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), section 17. 1, 'Law of Peoples not Ethnocentric'; also 68: 'To argue in these ways [ie largely the ways of the Enlightenment] would involve religious or philosophical doctrines that many decent hierarchical peoples might reject as liberal or democratic, or as in some way distinctive of Western political tradition and prejudicial to other cultures.'

<sup>18</sup> John Tasioulas adopts this interpretation in his 'International Law and the Limits of Fairness', *European Journal of International Law*, 13 (2002): 993–1023, section 2.

off, or may take some societies a long time to come around to, and the language of human rights is something that we use now and have reason to go on wanting to use now. Perhaps we need a case for human rights, or even a variety of cases, not made in what for many are alien Western terms. Perhaps we must still aim to avoid ethnocentricity.

But this does not follow. Hundreds of thousands of Westerners have adopted Asian religions, and not because they have managed to find Western metaphysical and ethical counterparts for these often culturally remote Asian beliefs, but, on the contrary, because they have looked into these religions on their own terms and been attracted by what they found. No one regards their Eastern origin as, in itself, an unscalable barrier. The alien can be baffling, but if this problem can be overcome by Westerners in the case of Eastern religions, why not Easterners in the case of the much more accessible Western human rights?

Full, definitive rational justification aside, there seem to me, as I said earlier,19 to be two ways to bring about unforced agreement on human rights. One would be to put the case for human rights as best we can construct it from resources of the Western tradition, and hope that non-Westerners will look into the case and be attracted by what they find. The other would be to search the ethical beliefs of various non-Western societies for indigenous ideas that might provide a local case for human rights, or for something not unlike them. This search is a valuable component of the current debate about Asian values, and many writers have helpfully explored the conceptual resources of Islam, Buddhism, Confucianism, and so on to that end. At first glance it will seem that this second approach (let me call it the less ethnocentric approach) is clearly the better one simply because less ethnocentric. But on a longer look the first approach (let me call it the more ethnocentric approach) is, I want to propose, on balance, preferable.

We now, in these cosmopolitan times, tend to exaggerate the differences between societies; societies change faster than foreigners' pictures of them.20 It is true that different parts of the world have sometimes had radically different histories, which still exert an influence on their vocabularies, their ways of thinking, their religions, their values. But the influences on the members of virtually all societies are now much more a mix of local and global than they were even a hundred years ago. Since then there has been a massive increase in global communication, convergence on economic structures, homogenization of ways of life due to growing prosperity, and widespread travel and study abroad precisely by the persons most likely to be influential in their society. Too many contemporary writers merely echo Rawls's belief that a pervasive and ineradicable feature of international life is a radical inter-society pluralism of conceptions of justice and the good. But Rawls's reasons for regarding these differences as ineradicable are difficult to find. We exaggerate, in particular, the disagreement between societies over human rights. Several Asian governments emphatically affirmed human rights in the Bangkok Declaration of 1993, though, it is true, also insisting that 'while human rights are universal in nature, they must be considered in

<sup>19</sup> See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 1.5.

<sup>20</sup> I discuss this more fully in Griffin, *On Human Rights*, sections 1.5 and 13.4.

the context of a dynamic and evolving process of international norm-setting, bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and various historic, cultural and religious backgrounds'.21 To declare that human rights are 'universal' but qualified by 'particularities' makes one alarmed about what that qualification will be used to justify. Still, there are loopholes in human rights themselves; no human right is absolute. Westerners themselves often contribute to the exaggeration of differences between East and West by exaggerating the strictness of the Western conception of human rights. Much of the flexibility and qualification in the Eastern conception is there, too, in theWestern conception, on an accurate account of it. There is a wide variety of conditions that outweigh or qualify human rights: for example, if the very survival of a good government is at stake, or if a large number of lives can be saved from terrorist attack.22 And there is a great difference between possessing a freedom and its possession's being of value. This raises the question, also prompted by the Bangkok Declaration, whether social and economic rights have priority over civil and political rights. I myself think that the arguments go heavily against such a priority,23 but these are all legitimate questions, as the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) (1948) perhaps too amply acknowledged,24 and they deserve serious answers. Still, these legitimate questions are raised by the 'particularities' not of Asian societies but of any society in certain circumstances of emergency, or at certain stages of development, or in facing certain ethical choices that we all face (for example, between the values of individualism and the values of community).

How might the less ethnocentric approach go today? An obvious move would be for members of each society to look for their own local understanding of what, according to the United Nations, is the ground of human rights—'the dignity of the human person'. One's local explanation of that idea need not repeat my explanation: namely, autonomy, liberty, and minimum provision. It might also include, for example, forms of justice and fairness and well-being that my account does not.25 But there is a problem for this whole strategy for reducing ethnocentricity.

The less ethnocentric approach, on the present interpretation, would come down to finding local values similar to the Enlightenment values of autonomy, liberty, justice, fairness, and so on. It would look for local counterparts of whatever Western values back human rights. It would then have to rely on the indigenous population's seeing how valuable these values or close counterparts of them are, and how they can serve as the ground of human rights. But this is virtually what the more ethnocentric approach does. The less ethnocentric approach might, of course, aim for greater independence of the Western approach to human rights. It might look, not for local counterparts of Enlightenment values, but for possibly non-equivalent indigenous values that can serve as that society's own peculiar ground for human rights. The Western ground and various non-Western grounds might turn out to support pretty much the same list of human rights. The advantage, it might be thought, in indigenous

<sup>21</sup> Bangkok Declaration (1993), preamble and Articles 1, 8.

<sup>22</sup> See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 3.2.

<sup>23.</sup> For reasons given by, eg, Partha Dasgupta, *An Enquiry into Well-Being and Destitution* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), ch. 5.

<sup>24</sup> UDHR, Article 29.2. 25 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 2.9.

societies' aiming for independence of Western ideas, would be that they would then accept human rights discourse more readily. Global conversation in terms of human rights could start straightaway. The drawback, however, is that the conversation would be likely to break down early. A useful human rights discourse is not made possible just by agreeing on the *names* of the various rights, which is all that agreement on the list secures. We need also to be able to determine a fair amount of their content to know how to settle some of the conflicts between them. Think of how the international law of human rights would be constrained if it knew only their names. To know their content and ways to resolve their conflicts requires knowing what the values are that ground human rights and to reach some measure of agreement on them. That is, international law requires such knowledge if, as I shall argue later, international law aspires, and should aspire, to incorporate basic human rights with ethical weight. It is hard to tell how well the international community could scrape along, agreeing only on the names of human rights; perhaps we are not far from that position now, and the discourse of human rights has, none the less, had some undeniably good results. But we should be much better off if we could agree on the contents of human rights and how to resolve their conflicts. And that constitutes a strong case for favouring the more ethnocentric approach, if it were found feasible.

And it is feasible. The deepest cultural divide in history is not between the West and China (for example, Confucianism, leaving Buddhism aside as an Indian import), and certainly not the West and Islam (Islam is an Abrahamic religion), but the West and India (Hinduism and Buddhist). The West aims at progress, at the growing achievement of the goods of human life; Hinduism at timeless, changeless being. Westerners see understanding as largely analytic—breaking things down into parts and discovering their interaction; for Hindu metaphysicians knowledge is an intuition of an indivisible whole, and differences between things are illusory. Westerners regard knowledge, in large part, as knowledge of the behaviour of external objects, as in paradigmatically that largely Western achievement, the natural sciences; in contrast, Hindus regard reality as a distinctionless, entirely static *nirvana*. And so on.26

But this deep cultural difference is not evidence of a serious current 'problem of ethnocentricity'. It is perfectly proper to use the word 'culture' in this context. The differences between the West and India go far back: the European idea of human rights goes back to the late Middle Ages, and the idea that human beings are made in God's image goes back to Genesis 1: 27. The Buddha was born about 563; Hinduism emerged centuries before that. Each of these religions developed at a time when Europe and India were sufficiently isolated for there to be criteria of identity for their 'cultures'. But our problem of ethnocentricity, we must take account of where each of us is *now*.

Also, the ultimate religious ideals are usually considerably different from, and far less influential in ordinary life than, the rules for everyday conduct that they also teach. Buddhism tells us to extinguish the self, but it also has rules for the whole pack of squabbling, thieving, lying ordinary people. Buddhism has its Five Precepts: do not kill, do not steal, do not lie, do not be unchaste, do not drink intoxicants. Jesus

<sup>26</sup> These contrasts are more fully drawn out by Archie J. Bahm, *Comparative Philosophy: Western, Indian and Chinese Philosophies Compared* (Albuquerque: World Books, revised 1995), esp. ch. III.

#### *James Griffin* 565

set unattainable standards: be ye therefore perfect; love thy neighbour as thyself. But Christianity never abandoned the down-to-earth Jewish Ten Commandments: thou shalt not steal, nor commit adultery, etc. So, though Indians may have heard occasionally about ultimate goals and ultimate reality, most of them, like most of the rest of humanity, lived their lives well this side of the 'ultimate'.

The picture of India as spiritual, mystical, anti-rational, in sharp contrast to a West of science, rationality, and progress, is a gross oversimplification. It became, none the less, the dominant European picture of India, not least because it was a self-serving picture for European colonists in need of a justification for their presumptuous civilizing mission. But, as Amartya Sen and others have shown, India has a long tradition of secular rationality, scientific investigation, and freedom of thought. It goes back at least to Ashoka, Buddhist Emperor of India in the third century BC, and to the late medieval and early modern period—a striking example given by Sen is the liberal thought of Akbar, the late sixteenth-century Mughal emperor of India.27 And these rational, liberal ideas spread widely among a middle-class elite during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

When Indians came in contact with the development of the natural sciences of the West, they had no trouble whatever, despite reality's being unchanging, understanding and contributing to the laws of its change. Similarly, when Indians campaigned for their independence from Britain, they had no trouble at all, despite autonomy's and liberty's being illusions, articulating what their aims were. When they were told by the British that they were not yet ready for self-government, that they would make mistakes, Gandhi replied: 'Freedom is not worth having if it does not include the freedom to make mistakes.'28 It may well be the case that the Hindu tradition, with its caste structure as the source of rights and privileges, contains no concept of the rights one has simply in virtue of being human.29 It may also be the case that the Buddhist tradition, with its focus on perfecting the individual through meditation and insight rather than on improving society, also lacks the concept.30 But this does not matter. The Hindus (and Muslims) who made up India at Independence seem to have had no trouble grasping the values of liberty and autonomy, and their Constitution (1950) puts beyond doubt that they had no trouble handling the language of human rights.31

27 Amartya Sen, *The Argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian History, Culture, and Identity* (Harmondsworth: Allen Lane, The Penguin Press, 2005), esp. chs. 1, 4, 13.

28 <http://www.quotationspage.com>, *sub* Mahatma Gandhi.

29 Jack Donnelly thinks so; see his article 'Traditional Values and Universal Human Rights: Caste in India', in Claude E. Welch Jr. and Virginia A. Leary (eds.), *Asian Perspective on Human Rights* (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990). This question is discussed by Harold Coward, *The Hindu Tradition*, vol. 4 of William H. Brackney (series ed.), *Human Rights and the World's Major Religions* (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2005).

30 Robert E. Florida thinks so; see his book *The Buddhist Tradition*, vol. 5 of Brackney (series ed.), *Human Rights and the World's Major Religions*, see 9, 205ff.

31 Part III of the Constitution is devoted to 'fundamental rights', which include guarantees of equality before the law (Article 14), no discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, or place or birth (Article 15), freedom of speech and expression, assembly, association, movement, and residence (Article 19), freedom of religion (Articles 25–28), and rights to life, personal liberty (Article 21), and due process (Article 22). What is more, the Indian drafters took Western constitutional practice as a model. See Pratap Kumar Ghosh, *The Constitution of India: How It Has Been Framed* (Calcutta: World Press, 1966), 70: 'The framers of our [Indian] Constitution shared the American view [viz. Jefferson's view that a democratic constitution should include a bill of rights] and, therefore, incorporated in our Constitution a And Aung San Suu Kyi, the determined human rights advocate in next-door Burma, regards human rights as consistent with and as developing Buddhist teaching.32

The case of India and the West reveals no serious, present-day divergence in understanding what human rights are and why they are important.33

### **IV. Tolerance**

I have already discussed John Rawls's views on human rights.34 I want now to look at what he says about tolerance between peoples. There may be 'decent' peoples, as Rawls calls them,35 who reject some of the items on the Enlightenment list of human rights.

list of fundamental rights'; also M. V. Pylee, *India's Constitution* (Bombay: Asia Publishing House, 1962), 3: 'The makers of the Indian Constitution draw much from the American Constitution though not its brevity . . .Thus the Constitution of India is the result of considerable imitation and adaptation. . . '.

32 See Florida, *Buddhist Tradition*, 209.

33 Nor, I believe, does the case of Islam and the West. In cultural terms Islam is very much closer to the Jewish–Christian West than is India. Islam accepts the Old and New Testaments as among its own holy scriptures, and the prophets, including Jesus, as its prophets, too. In philosophy, Islam was deeply influenced by the writings of Classical Greece and Rome. In mathematics and the natural sciences, Islam was often well ahead of Europe during the Middle Ages. In social thought, Muhammad, by being more detailed than Jesus in his moral teaching and more specific about the desired social order, was in many ways also more explicitly egalitarian. The Koran prescribes a Poor Due, a two-and-a-half per cent tax on the rich to aid the poor. This may look meagre alongside the tithe of Jews and Christians, but the two taxes are quite different: the tithe was devoted more to the maintenance of religious institutions than, as with the Poor Due, to direct help for the poor, and the two-and-a-half per cent was levied not just on one's income but also on one's holdings. (See Huston Smith, *The World's Religions* (San Francisco: Harper, 1991), 246, 250.) And there was often more freedom of religion in Islam than in the West. 'Let there be no compulsion in religion', says the Koran (2: 257; see also 5: 48). When the Catholics conquered Andalusia, where the Muslims had for long tolerated Jews and Christians, they expelled, slaughtered, or forced Muslims and Jews to convert. When the Muslims conquered Constantinople, they allowed the Eastern Catholic Church to carry on much as before, and Constantinople (Istanbul) is still today its seat. On Muslim tolerance of other religions, see Bernard Lewis, *The Crisis of Islam* (New York: Random House, 2004), xxix–xxx. I go through this recital so quickly because the facts are familiar. One would have no more trouble discussing autonomy, liberty, and minimum provision with many modern Muslims than one would with many modern Indians. Not with all Muslims, admittedly; not clearly, eg, with the Taliban of Afghanistan. Different Muslims draw very different lessons from the Koran. The Koran seems to teach very different lessons, from rare tolerance of non-believers, as above, to bloodthirsty intolerance, as in the famous 'verse of the sword': 'Fight and slay the pagans wherever you find them: seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in wait for them in every stratagem.' But differences within a cultural group are not, of course, differences between cultural groups. The term 'fundamentalism' acquired its present sense used of conservative Protestant evangelicals in the United States in the 1920s, and its contemporary Eastern and Western versions probably have causes in common: perhaps a desperation resulting from a fear that the modern world is inexorably leaving them behind. (See Malise Ruthven, *Fundamentalism: The Search for Meaning* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 10–15.) But there are, no doubt, causes special to Islam: a history of colonial exploitation, poverty, lack of education, the legacy of the Crusades and of the Ottoman penetration into Europe culminating in the second siege of Vienna in the late seventeenth century. And part of the explanation of the tension between the West and Muslim Middle East must be simply that they are next-door neighbours—geographical proximity rather than cultural distance. Think of the Protestants and Catholics in Ulster. The record of democracy in the Islamic world is varied, encompassing as it does North and Middle Africa, Turkey, the Middle East, the Indian sub-continent, South-East Asia, and Indonesia. But much the same political variation can be found in Latin America, where the explanation is unlikely to be cultural difference from Europe. Economic structures must play an important part in explaining the political structures of both Islam and Latin America. All that I want to deny is that cultural differences between Islam and the West are largely responsible for their political differences. They play a role, but so does much else.

34 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 1.5. 35 *LP,* 61–7.

#### *James Griffin* 567

Some rights may be contrary to deep, sincerely held commitments of theirs—religious beliefs, say, about the role of women. So long as a people counts as 'decent', however, it deserves our tolerance. 'To tolerate', Rawls says, 'means not only to refrain from exercising political sanctions. . .to make a people change its ways', but also 'to recognize these non-liberal societies as equal participating members in good standing of the Society of Peoples.'36 Granting decent, non-liberal peoples this form of respect may encourage them to reform themselves, or at least not discourage reform, while denying them respect might well do so.37 But there is also a non-instrumental reason to grant them respect: it is their due.

Rawls takes as his example of a decent, non-liberal people an imaginary hierarchical Islamic society, Kazanistan.38 He attributes the difference in political structure between Kazanistan and a Western liberal country largely to their cultural, particularly religious, differences. For the reasons just given, this seems to me highly doubtful. Rawls's question about tolerance, though, need not be motivated by cultural differences. A decent hierarchical people, according to Rawls, has two defining properties. One is that such a people does not have aggressive aims. The other is that its system of law secures human rights for all, imposes genuine moral obligations upon its members, and its legal officials sincerely and not unreasonably believe that the law is guided by a common good conception of justice.39 Recall, though, that Rawls substantially shortens the list of human rights and reduces their function.40 His list omits such typical human rights as freedom of expression, freedom of association (except for the limited form needed for freedom of conscience and religious observance), the right to democratic political participation, and any economic rights that go beyond mere subsistence. And he reduces human rights to two functions: fixing both the rules of war and the grounds for international intervention.

A great obstacle to our accepting Rawls's shortened list of human rights—especially if, like Rawls, we want a list with a realistic chance of being adopted—is that it would never be accepted by the international community. The United Nations' list of human rights is too deeply entrenched for it to be changed quite so greatly. It could no doubt be amended here and there, but not subjected to Rawls's radical surgery at its very heart. The international community would firmly resist the reduction of the discourse of human rights to Rawls's two functions only; it would carry on using human rights to assess the behaviour of a single nation and institutions within a nation; and many of us, I believe, would go on using them to assess even the conduct of individual persons. Rawls, it is true, does not deny that the rights he drops from the list could appear among a people's 'fundamental' or 'international' rights. They are not, though, human rights proper, he says; they are merely 'liberal aspirations'.41 But this is a radical demotion in their status, and it is this demotion that would be resisted. That raises a question about a strong, unexamined assumption of Rawls's. 'I leave aside', he says, 'the many difficulties of interpreting . . .rights and limits, and take their general meaning and tendency as clear enough.'42 There is, of course, some clarity to them; they are not nonsense. But my first chapter was devoted to arguing that there is an intolerable

> 36 *LP,* 59. 37 *LP,* 62. 38 *LP,* 5, 75–8. 39 *LP*, 64–7. 40 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 1.5. 41 *LP*, 80 fn 23. 42 *LP*, 27.

degree of indeterminacy of sense in what a human right is—an indeterminacy that leaves unclear the criteria both for what should be on the list of human rights and, even more worryingly, what the contents of the individual rights are. This applies also to all the rights on Rawls's own shortened list: for example, the rights to life, liberty, health, and welfare, each of which I shall come to later.43 We can make our understanding of these rights adequate for our own thought only with the addition of some further substantive value. It need not be my addition, only *some* addition. Once the value is added, however, it will determine which human rights there are, and they can then be restricted in the arbitrary way that Rawls chooses to do.

There is another worry. There are grounds for intervention that are not violations of human rights. I argued earlier that the domains of human rights and of justice overlap, but are not congruent.44 Some matters of justice—for example, certain forms of retributive and distributive justice—are not matters of human rights. Imagine, for instance, a country structured socially so that nearly all of its great prosperity goes to a small white colonial elite, leaving the mass of the black native population just at subsistence level. If this gross injustice were also likely to persist for some time, diplomatic or economic sanctions might well be justified. Think of a country somewhat like South Africa under apartheid, but with a decent consultation hierarchy that works well enough to raise the poor to subsistence level but not higher. So far as his theory goes, Rawls is free to amend it to say that serious violation of human rights is sufficient, but not necessary, to justify intervention, and that certain violations of justice (and perhaps yet more) are also sufficient. Actually, Rawls treats observance of human rights as definitive of a decent hierarchical society, without mention of retributive or distributive justice.45 Admittedly, he does mention as also definitive the possession of 'a common good conception of justice',46 but it is doubtful that this requires acceptance of a principle for distribution of welfare at fairly high levels.47 Rawls cannot believe that a common good conception requires a society to raise its members above subsistence level, because a decent hierarchical society need not do more than that. My example of the South Africa-like country raises doubts that subsistence level is high enough. A satisfactory case that the level must be higher than subsistence is likely to make appeal to something especially valuable about human status that will not be protected by mere subsistence, and once that special value starts generating rights, no arbitrary stopping points are allowable.

The serious weakness in Rawls's functional explanation of human rights is that it leaves the content of his shortened list—the content both of the list itself and of each individual right—unworkably obscure. How do we determine, for example, the minimum of welfare required by human rights? If one has a further substantive value to appeal to—say, the value attaching to normative agency—then the minimum would be the somewhat more generous provision of what is necessary to function effectively as a normative agent. But it looks as if Rawls could, if he wanted, avail himself of an altogether different approach to fix the minimum. He could ask: at what level of welfare would its neglect start to provide prima facie justification for intervention by

<sup>45</sup> *LP*, 65–7. 46 *LP*, 65. 47 *LP*, 88.

<sup>43</sup> See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, chs 8, 9, 11. 44 See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, section 2.6.

#### *James Griffin* 569

other peoples? But confronted with that question, we would not know how to answer. We should need help from some further substantive ethical thought. We might, for instance, appeal to the idea of 'the dignity of the human person', but that suffers badly from vagueness. We should lose the dignity of our normative agency, for instance, before we sank as low as mere subsistence. Subsistence that forced us to labour all our waking hours just to scratch out an existence from the earth, without leisure, reflection, or hope, brutalized by our conditions, would lack the dignity of normative agency. So, if this were our line of thought, we should still need to determine what sort of 'dignity' is at work in human rights. In any case, Rawls does not seem to avail himself of this approach. Instead, as we have just seen, he assumes that 'the general meaning and tendency' of human rights are already 'clear enough'. But, as I have argued, they are not.

I am not trying here to make a contribution of my own to the understanding of tolerance, important though that matter is. My interest now is human rights, and my conclusion negative. We should not follow Rawls's lead in commandeering the language of human rights to explain intervention. The language that he can provide is too indeterminate in sense to do so, and, once its sense is made more satisfactorily determinate, it will contain what is needed to justify the ampler list of human rights that, for so long, the tradition has championed.