---
title: "Liberty Rights and the Limits of Liberal Democracy"
author:
  - name: "Jiwei Ci"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "588–607"
citation_key: "ci2015liberty"
---

## <span id="page-602-0"></span> [Liberty Rights and the Limits](#page-9-0)  [of Liberal Democracy](#page-9-0)

#### *Jiwei Ci*

Liberty rights are first among human rights, both in order of invention and in importance usually ascribed. They begin life (or their first life) as liberal rights, rights enjoyed by members of liberal societies, and come to be treated as human rights through extension to the international arena. Thus liberty rights have a double identity and are doubly ambitious: as liberal rights, they create, legitimate, and intensify the desire characteristic of members of liberal societies for nothing less than some form of self-determination; as human rights, they generalize what originally was a culturally particular desire into a universal human aspiration worthy of the strongest protection. As a committed and precisely for this reason uneasy believer in liberty rights or, more precisely, in many of the things liberty rights are supposed to make possible, I want to see how well liberty rights live up to these two ambitions and what lessons we can draw if they fall short. By considering liberty rights in their double identity, I hope especially to arrive at a critical appraisal of liberty rights as human rights that would be difficult to reach by attending to liberty rights as human rights alone.

#### **I. Liberty Rights as Human Rights**

It seems appropriate to start from what strikes me as a deep contradiction in the concept of human rights, especially liberty rights as a subset of human rights. The contradiction lies between the universalism and supposed minimalism of human rights, on the one hand, and the fact that human rights—again I have in mind liberty rights in particular—are not necessary conditions for human beings to live what is normally and reasonably recognized as a human life, on the other. I call the latter a fact because people in different times and places have led humanly meaningful and worthwhile lives without anything like liberty rights. I am not denying (nor at this point affirming) that a human life without the protection of liberty rights is one that would become better with such protection, but only saying that liberty rights impose on human life a standard that goes beyond what human beings strictly need in order to live a humanly meaningful and worthwhile life. In this significant sense, it is a mistake to consider the concept of human rights minimalist, at least when it comes to liberty rights, and to regard liberty rights as rights that human beings have simply by virtue of being human. Whatever reasons may justify liberty rights, it cannot be that these reasons are such that they must be made good if human beings are to live a human life. Liberty rights, no matter how justified, cannot be justified as human rights on any minimalist conception.

This is no terminological quibble. Once a minimalist justification is shown not to work for liberty rights, we can no longer use the concept of human rights as applied to liberty rights. The only way to be precise and upfront about what we mean by liberty rights would be to say that liberty rights are the rights that human beings have when being human is conceived *in a particular way*. This particular way requires a spelling out and a justification in which one must be aware of one's political or ideological position and put one's cards on the table. Since the task at hand is that of the clarification and justification of a *particular* conception of being human and of the rights that follow from this conception, one must steer clear of all talk of rights that human beings have simply by virtue of being human. We are thus led, once again, to see a contradiction in the very concept of human rights as applied to liberty rights.

It is characteristic of philosophical treatments of human rights that, when human rights are understood as the rights that human beings have simply by virtue of being human, being human (in "by virtue of being human") is in turn understood in terms of agency. There is nothing wrong with this second step, for agency is indeed what is fundamental to human being. What is problematic is a further step that is at least implicit in so much philosophical theorizing about human rights: the understanding of human agency on the model of a particular (liberal) configuration of human agency. The problem here does not lie in configuring human agency in a particular (liberal) way but in treating human agency as disclosed by *any* particular configuration as if it is human agency as such.

What do I mean by human agency *as such*? Human beings act in human ways, and it is in so acting that they become and remain all that is distinctively and variously human. What is at stake in human action is not only self-preservation, individually and collectively, but also, for each individual, the acquisition of a certain identity as a specific kind of human being embedded in various significant human groups, and, for each group, the construction of a collective identity embedded in turn in an yet larger, social setting, and so on. All human action requires a certain amount of room—objective freedom in a generic (as distinct from a liberal) sense. This room could be all that is needed for self-preservation. But what makes human action distinctively human is the other stake in it, that which involves self-making, where the self may be individual or collective on various scales. For self-making to be accomplished, whatever the self in the making happens to be like and to whatever degree this self may lack initiative or self-consciousness, the self has to participate with a significant degree of willingness—subjective freedom in a generic sense—if not initial voluntariness. One cannot acquire a self or an identity, with all its meaning and spirit, without some active and willing involvement of oneself, and, of course, this involvement in turn requires room. This involvement is a matter of degree, just as the room available is a matter of degree, but no one can altogether do without either. Thus, given its goals and stakes, human action needs both more or less room and more or less willingness of participation. We need a much more complex account than I can provide here in order to understand how these needs are negotiated, contested, and constantly reshaped. But one thing already seems quite clear: room for action and willingness of participation are the only necessary conditions of human agency as such, as distinct from any particular, culturally specific configuration of agency, and they are jointly sufficient for human agency.1

It is worth emphasizing that I have spoken of the room for action as *objective freedom* and of the willingness of participation as *subjective freedom*, and of both as *generic freedom*, as distinct from freedom in a liberal sense. There is a world of difference between generic freedom and liberal freedom: no human being can survive for long as a human being, and no human society as a human society, without a significant degree of generic freedom. But liberal freedom is largely a modern invention, and it has served as part of the configuration of agency, and hence as a necessary condition of agency, only for that minority of the world's population which inhabits liberal or liberal democratic societies. Liberal freedom consists in carving out a certain amount of space for generic freedom explicitly in the name of the right to *individual freedom* of various types of action, and in creating and maintaining a special kind of willingness of participation that is conceived in terms of *individual autonomy*.

It is characteristic of proponents of liberal freedom that they mistake their conception of liberal freedom for one of generic freedom. "Out of the notion of personhood," writes James Griffin, meaning by personhood the status of a normative agent,

we can generate most of the conventional list of human rights. We have a right to life (without it, personhood is impossible), to security of person (for the same reason), to a voice in political decision (a key exercise of autonomy), to free expression, to assembly, and to a free press (without them exercise of autonomy would be hollow), to worship (a key exercise of what one takes to be the point of life).2

Is a voice in political decision really essential for human status as distinct from human flourishing, a distinction on which Griffin himself insists?3 And is free expression really essential to meet the modest standard of human status? In both cases, hardly. These, and other things such as free assembly and a free press, may be regarded as necessary conditions for a good human life, on one understanding of such a life. But mere human status does not require so much. What is needed for human status must be sufficiently general and undemanding to allow all kinds of societies other than liberal ones to qualify as human societies, that is, as societies whose members under ordinary circumstances live a life compatible with human status.

Rather than treating members of non-liberal societies as being denied the necessary conditions for human agency, then, it would be more accurate, and more consistent with the spirit of liberalism itself, to say that members of liberal societies live a distinctive kind of human life for which liberal freedom, in the shape of liberty rights, serves as a necessary condition. This does not mean that liberals cannot reasonably fault non-liberal societies, but they can do so only on the grounds that the latter fail to provide sufficient generic freedom as distinct from liberal freedom. Nor does it mean that liberals cannot reasonably argue for the superiority of the liberal way of life, but

<sup>1</sup> For a more substantial account, see Jiwei Ci, "Evaluating Agency: A Fundamental Question for Social and Political Philosophy," *Metaphilosophy*, 42(3) (April 2011): 261–81.

<sup>2</sup> James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), 33.

<sup>3</sup> See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 34.

they can do so only by trying to show that a liberal society offers the prospect of a better human life rather than the only acceptable form of life for human beings as agents. It follows that in neither case is it reasonable for liberals to invoke the idea of liberty rights as human rights.

#### **II. Liberty Rights as Liberal Rights**

To say that liberty rights are too strong as *human* rights is not to imply that they are unproblematic as *liberal* rights. There is, I believe, a lot to be said for liberty rights in principle. But I also believe that liberty rights as understood in the standard way are *too weak* as liberal rights, and this is shown by a contradiction within the liberal approach to liberty rights in a liberal society. Within this approach, liberty rights are pitched at an awe-inspiringly high level of ambition, as allowing individuals to be nothing less than the architects of their own lives and the authors of their own identities: sovereign individuals, according to one familiar way of putting it. This applies not only to determining what life one wants to lead and what kind of self one wants to be (autonomy) but also to choosing how one goes about putting such self-determination into effect (liberty).4 Liberty thus understood is relatively straightforward, at least in broad outline, subject as it is only to some harm principle and to certain not too stringent considerations of justice and social efficiency. Autonomy, on the other hand, is an altogether more complicated matter.

It is in the very nature of the human form of life that individual self-determination can take place only in a social setting that individuals cannot determine remotely in the same way or to the same degree that they can determine their own lives *within* it. This social setting draws a line, a fuzzy and mobile yet (at any given time) firm line, separating more or less real possibilities for acting and being from near impossibilities and as yet unimagined possibilities, and thus opening up a space of actual freedoms as distinct from unfreedoms as well as undreamed-of freedoms. And it is of varying levels, from specific practices through broad institutions to a whole social system, an entire way of life, and, at its all-encompassing and most elusive, the "mood" or "spirit" of an age. The higher the level, the more profound if less tangible will be its effect on all those living under its spell and sway, and yet the more powerless individuals are in their ability to determine it as they determine their own lives within its confines. The highest level recedes beyond the power and cognitive grasp of most, and more often than not into sheer invisibility.

Yet every social setting, however large and complex, is humanly made—the corrigible result of struggles for survival and dominance. The struggles themselves get ever more complicated as later struggles take place in an environment created by earlier struggles, all too often difficult or impossible to reverse, and are complicated further still by the fact that all struggles are informed by and conducted in the name of values,

<sup>4</sup> See Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 33, 149 for the distinction between autonomy and liberty. Clearly, Griffin's notion of autonomy is different from and less stringent than Kant's. Since this is the notion of autonomy that is invoked in the human rights discourse in general, for easily understandable reasons, I will follow Griffin's usage, with a corresponding adjustment to the meaning of heteronomy.

which in turn have a tendency to take on a life of their own, though never in complete independence from the reality which they help shape. None of this can be consciously planned and executed in a liberal social setting, of course, least of all in its entirety. But because social settings are determined by struggles for power, with interests and values on the line, there are bound to be winners and losers. The most important difference between winners and losers in our world today is that between the "movers and shakers"—the "Davos Men," for example5—on the one hand and the helpless multitude on the other. The latter have no say in how the social setting—the dominant games and their rules—is determined and are left to exercise their individual autonomy in an environment that is entirely of other people's making. This state of affairs is well captured by John Dunn:

A world at last fit for capitalism will be a world in which those whose talents, good fortune and energy equip them to trade profitably profit handsomely, irrespective of where they happen to have been born. It will be a world in which property rights are highly secure, but other human claims have force only insofar as they fit comfortably with the security of property rights. In this sense, it will be a world of increasingly pure power, where the strong take what they can get and the weak endure what they have to.6

Despite this, the weak are no less autonomous than the strong: in a liberal society the weak and the strong enjoy strictly equal autonomy *within* the given social setting. Where the weak are relatively inferior to the strong is in their ability to use their autonomy (and liberty) to get what they want. What matters even more is that the weak are absolutely inferior to the strong in their ability to shape the social setting for individual autonomy. It is true even of the most accomplished form of liberal democracy, and hence of any global arrangement made in its image, that the strong not only "take what they can get" but also, with infinitely greater audacity and consequence, determine what there is to take and is worth getting. And this means that what the weak have to "endure" is not only a much smaller share of whatever they can use their autonomy (and liberty) to get but also, at a deeper level that may elude their conscious awareness, the fact that they are little more than an inert multitude when it comes to shaping the social setting that frames and constrains their exercise of autonomy.

In the face of the great disparity in power to determine the social setting for individual autonomy, it would be a very inadequate response to say that this setting is by nature heteronomously determined and to leave it at that. It is undoubtedly the case that no individual *qua* individual can autonomously determine the social setting for his or her exercise of autonomy. In this sense, all individual autonomy is heteronomously determined. It does not follow, however, that individuals cannot, as participants in a social setting, have a say in shaping it: a greater say is more autonomous or less heteronomous. Thus, while the basic fact of the heteronomous determination of the social setting for individual autonomy cannot be changed, it can be redeemed, as it

<sup>5</sup> See Richard Sennett, *The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work in the New Capitalism* (New York: W. W. Norton, 1998), 61.

<sup>6</sup> John Dunn, *The Cunning of Unreason* (New York: Basic Books, 2000), 332.

were, or rendered largely free of domination, by making the participation of individuals in this determination as autonomous, perhaps as equally autonomous, as humanly possible. In this regard, what is commonly called democracy is of no help, since such democracy takes place within a more or less fixed and unexamined social setting as much as individual autonomy does.

What is heteronomously determined, moreover, is not just the social setting in which individual autonomy is exercised. When individuals reach a point at which they are able, and can be trusted, to exercise their autonomy, they have already been shaped in a particular way—down to their innermost being, including their desire for individual autonomy and their probable lack of willingness and ability to look beyond such autonomy to the social setting that constrains it. It is a basic fact of the human form of life that individuals are determined before they can come to determine themselves, and how they determine themselves cannot but bear the inerasable imprint of the prior determination from the outside. Thus, the heteronomy that makes autonomy possible extends, beyond the determination of the social setting for individual autonomy, to the very constitution of the subjects of individual autonomy.

With regard to this second kind of heteronomy, it is obvious that the strong and the weak are in the same boat. Nothing can be done about this heteronomy directly: no matter how autonomous we can come to be, our very status as autonomous subjects is determined from the outside in the first place. For this reason, the way in which the first kind of heteronomous determination can be redeemed does not quite apply here—though not completely, as we shall see. What must be done instead to redeem this second kind of heteronomy is something with which those among us with a thoroughly postmetaphysical outlook may feel very uncomfortable, as we have no choice but to ask and attempt to answer a question that takes our focus away from the form of autonomy to its content. The question is this: whether, in any given case, the actual heteronomous determination of autonomous subjects is *ethically* good in terms of the kind of things that such subjects are disposed to do and the kind of persons they are disposed to be rather than whether they do such things or come to be such persons autonomously.

While so-called autonomous subjects cannot but be heteronomously determined, they can be so determined in *substantively different* ways. Accordingly, although members even of a fully liberal society cannot reasonably hope each to create their own individual autonomy instead of only exercising it, they can reflect on the kind of individual autonomy they have been disposed by their society to develop, and decide for themselves whether it is worthy of endorsement after the fact. Such reflection will not be easy, of course, as properly socialized subjects, however autonomous, are disposed not to seriously challenge the determinants of the actual shape of their autonomy. Moreover, such reflection, however critical, will tend to draw on resources that are made available by the very society that is placed under reflection. But experience shows that reflective endorsement is a possible way of redeeming the heteronomous determination of autonomous subjects in a liberal society. Indeed, the exercise of reflection accompanied by the power to give or withhold endorsement is itself a form of autonomy.

To complicate the picture slightly, it is possible to apply to the first fact of heteronomy the consideration that presents itself more naturally in the case of the second, and vice versa. In other words, we can ask of the social setting for individual autonomy whether it is conducive to choosing and living a good life, and ask of the socialization of individuals into autonomous subjects whether the process itself, though essentially heteronomous, cannot be made less resistant to individual revision and hence more compatible with individual autonomy. But in the main, as I have said, the heteronomous determination of the social setting for individual autonomy calls for redemption in terms of more equal participation, while the heteronomous determination of autonomous subjects cannot be fully redeemed without ethical reflection on what is done with autonomy.

When I say that liberty rights are too weak as liberal rights, what I mean is that proponents of liberty rights for a liberal society fail to confront the two facts of the heteronomous determination of individual autonomy and therefore miss the opportunity to make liberty rights stronger in the light of these facts. They miss the opportunity to make liberty rights stronger, first, by failing to reflect on the *political* question of whether one should regard individual autonomy as seriously compromised if the social setting for individual autonomy is shaped by grossly unequal relations of power. They miss the opportunity to make liberty rights stronger, second, by failing to consider the *ethical* question of how one should assess the good of individual autonomy if the social setting that determines the socialization of autonomous subjects is stacked against the choice and pursuit of worthwhile conceptions of the good life capable of withstanding a suitable degree of critical reflection. Since proponents of liberty rights do not raise these questions, they give the impression that liberal societies are immune to problems suggested by them. But this impression is mistaken.

Regarding the political question, a hint will suffice. Nowhere is this question more manifest and pressing than in the impact of global capitalism on our social world. One cannot read Leo Panitch and Sam Gindin, Sheldon Wolin, Gary Cross, John Gray, and Zygmunt Baumann, to name a somewhat random assortment of the many plausible writers on the subject, without forming the hypothesis that the exercise of individual autonomy is warped, compromised, and even undermined when it is framed by a social setting increasingly dominated by global capital.7 And one does not have to be persuaded by all or even most of what these authors have to say on the subject to see the initial plausibility of such a hypothesis.

This hypothesis finds strong theoretical and historical underpinnings in Karl Polanyi's classic work, *The Great Transformation*, which can be read, among other things, as an account of highly compulsive attempts by the forces of capital to disembed

<sup>7</sup> See Leo Panitch and Sam Gindin, *The Making of Global Capitalism: The Political Economy of American Empire* (London: Verso, 2012); Sheldon Wolin, *Democracy Incorporated: Managed Democracy and the Specter of Inverted Totalitarianism* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008); Gary Cross, *An All-Consuming Century: Why Commercialism Won in Modern America* (New York: Columbia University Press, 2000); John Gray, *False Dawn: The Delusions of Global Capitalism* (New York: New Press, 1998); and Zygmunt Bauman, *Does Ethics Have a Chance in a World of Consumers?* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).

the economy from society and to run society as an "adjunct to the market."8 Although such disembedding is impossible to achieve fully in reality, as Polanyi shows, and thus the idea is a fiction, there is little doubt that the very making of such attempts has left a deep mark on the whole organization of modern society, including the practice of individual autonomy, as no other social force has done. Thus Polanyi is able to concentrate his strictures against nineteenth-century capitalism into the single most important charge that "The congenital weakness of nineteenth-century society was not that it was industrial but that it was a *market society*" (as distinct from a mere market economy).9 What was true of nineteenth-century capitalism is no less true of the increasingly global capitalism for which the ascendancy of neoliberalism has provided the most obvious impetus and ideology. This global version of the Great Transformation, which Polanyi did not live to see, has effectively reversed an earlier process remarked with a note of optimism by Polanyi "under which the economic system ceases to lay down the law to society and the primacy of society over that system is secured."10 The pendulum has decidedly swung back in favor of the fiction and partial reality of a market society, this time on a global scale, and there is little evidence to suggest that the reaction to the first Great Transformation for much of the twentieth century is about to repeat itself. The power of capital to shape society and human life has never been as wide and deep as it is now.

Polanyi's thesis of the Great Transformation is not undisputed, to be sure, and the same is true of the views of authors, including those I have referred to, who have charted the course of the Great Transformation in its recent, global phase under the auspices of neoliberalism. But these authors, between them, clearly help cast reasonable doubt on the legitimacy of the liberal democratic social setting for individual autonomy when that setting is so powerfully shaped by global capital. This reasonable doubt is all we need to take proponents of liberty rights to task for failing to respond to it.

More complicated is the ethical question. As we have seen, the question of *how* the social setting for individual autonomy (and for the socialization of autonomous subjects) is determined is distinct from the question of *what* that social setting is like (and what the autonomous subjects are like). The latter question has to do with what choices of life, considered severally or as a range, autonomous individuals are able and likely to make within a given social setting and whether the autonomous choices enabled and constrained by such a setting are conducive to the good life. The two questions are distinct and largely independent, and it is impossible to say which is more important. But it is not difficult to argue that, when one has serious (political) reservations about how the social setting for individual autonomy is determined, those reservations are compounded if one also separately comes to the (ethical) judgment that the social setting thus determined happens to present serious and unnecessary obstacles to the good life. And it is not difficult to arrive at the further thought, in the spirit of

<sup>8</sup> Karl Polanyi, *The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time* (Boston: Beacon Press, 2nd Beacon pbk. edn., 2001), 60.

<sup>9</sup> Polanyi, *The Great Transformation*, 258; the entire sentence is italicized in the original.

<sup>10</sup> Polanyi, *The Great Transformation*, 259. On this reversal, see Gray, *False Dawn*.

a hypothesis, that the wrong "how" and the bad "what" are related in a way that is not accidental. Such, I believe, is the case with the undermining of individual autonomy by global capital: the social setting for individual autonomy is overwhelmingly shaped by global capital, and, furthermore, it is shaped in such a way as to make choosing and pursuing the good life an increasingly uphill struggle. Having made the first, political argument briefly, I want next to say something more substantial about the second, ethical argument.

Since this is a complex issue that does not permit comprehensive treatment here, I will illustrate my argument by looking at what people tend to do with their liberty rights under the familiar principle of equal opportunity in a competitive capitalist social setting. There is no reason to see obstacles to the good life in competitive activities simply in virtue of their competitiveness. A sensible appraisal depends on the kind of things people compete for in such activities, how they compete for them, and with what effects on themselves and their fellows and on their social and natural environment. The notion of a practice as elucidated by Alasdair MacIntyre is very helpful for pinpointing what is amiss with the sort of competitive activities that liberty rights typically entitle people to join under the principle of equal opportunity.11 What we see in liberal democratic societies, with their distinctive kind of competitiveness and social mobility, is the gradual breakdown of practices with a corresponding corrosion of character (to use Sennett's phrase). As more and more people are drawn into the competitive activities that make up the social domain,12 they compete more and more for external instead of internal goods. This opening up of the social domain to all is informed by the liberal principle of equal opportunity while the displacement of internal by external goods is driven by the need of capital to expand consumption and profit. With the eclipse of internal by external goods, people also come to compete more and more for the same things, for all external goods find their measure and common denominator in money (power being beyond the reach of most) and what money can buy and symbolize. In this process of externalization and homogenization, practices break down in two senses.

The first has to do with the very nature of a practice. Since a practice is defined by the internal goods achievable in it, it loses its character as a practice the moment when the pursuit of its internal, constitutive goods gives way to the desire to acquire the external goods that are only contingently related to the practice. What is left is only the shell of a practice, as its internal goods are hollowed out and members of the practice engage in it exclusively or chiefly for the external goods which they could in principle secure from any other activity. When people lose the desire to pursue the internal goods of a practice, they also lose the motivation to cultivate and practice the virtues internal to that practice or, as MacIntyre shows, to *any* practice, for the virtues such as justice, courage, and honesty are nothing but firm dispositions conducive to the pursuit of internal goods. This is the second sense in which a practice can break down

<sup>11</sup> Alasdair MacIntyre, *After Virtue*, 2nd edn. (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1984), esp. ch. 14.

<sup>12</sup> For a particularly illuminating analysis of what the "social" means, see Hannah Arendt on "the rise of the social" in *The Human Condition* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958), ch. 2.

#### *Jiwei Ci* 597

and it is continuous with the first. What gets lost with the erosion of the virtues is a certain attitude to work and life. It is the attitude of someone who knows the distinction between the internal and external goods of a practice, who places internal ahead of external goods, who cultivates and practices the virtues as an intrinsic part of the pursuit of the internal goods, who on the strength of these virtues has an internally engendered motivation to refrain from adopting certain means even when he or she also takes a reasonable interest in acquiring the external goods available, who maintains a certain solidarity with fellow members of the practice despite the competitiveness of the practice or even in part because of its specific kind of competitiveness, and who, all in all, is capable of achieving a life that is as good as it is autonomous.

What is especially disturbing about the breakdown of practices is not so much the nearly exclusive competition for external goods as the fact that what is chiefly at stake in this competition is the relative value of individual identities. The competition for external goods is at bottom a competition for symbolic carriers of socially valorized individual identities. It is this fact that gives a particular character both to the competition and to the kind of self that emerges from it. Take away the internal goods and the virtues, and what is left is only a competitive quest for more highly valued individual identities through the struggle for larger shares of external goods. Insofar as individuals constitute themselves through such a quest, they cannot but develop identities that are marked by two general features. On the one hand, individual identities formed in the competition for external goods are hollow and spiritless since no one can really put one's heart and soul into activities aimed at acquiring external goods. Yet, on the other hand, such identities have something fiercely competitive about them, in that, in the absence of internal goods and the related virtues, people find their worth only through comparison with others and at the expense of others. This combination makes for a regime of self-constitution in which people acquire what is most important for themselves through efforts directed at the most unsuitable objects and in the least auspicious manner.

It is necessary to place this general account under a more differentiated historical perspective, as this will allow us to see that the process comprising the breakdown of practices and the atrophy of the virtues has greatly accelerated in the past few decades. In this context, Richard Sennett can be seen as providing a sociological fleshing out of MacIntyre's philosophical sketch of the breakdown of practices, and, just as important, as picking up where MacIntyre leaves off by reflecting on the more recent developments in such a breakdown in the braver newer world of global capitalism. What Sennett gives us is a picture of a new "ideal man or woman" who is at home in the new capitalism and is indeed a product of "the culture of the new capitalism." This is a "self oriented to the short term, focused on potential ability, [and] willing to abandon past experience"13—in other words, a self (or semblance of self) willing and able to reinvent itself constantly and in any way called for in an ever more flexible workplace in return for maximum gain in external goods as markers of individual worth. Just as in MacIntyre's general account, so in Sennett's more specific one, this kind of seeker of external goods may be as autonomous as one could wish, provided that one

<sup>13</sup> Richard Sennett, *The Culture of the New Capitalism* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006), 5.

does not call into question the social setting in which he or she is disposed to exercise individual autonomy. The quest for external goods and for individual identity in terms of external goods is perfectly compatible with individual autonomy. Indeed, it is the typical way in which members of liberal societies today exercise their individual autonomy, with the "ideal man or woman" depicted by Sennett as the latest version of the autonomous individual.14

To me this "ideal man or woman" represents anything but a truly autonomous individual capable of leading a good life. If proponents of liberty rights share this judgment, it should seriously worry them that the good life fails to materialize and yet the so-called individual autonomy is left intact as long as the individuals involved do not feel imposed upon by being socialized in the image of this ideal. What makes matters worse is that "Most people are not like this [the ideal man or woman]; they need a sustaining life narrative, they take pride in being good at something specific, and they value the experiences they've lived through. The cultural ideal required in new institutions thus damages many of the people who inhabit them."15 The claim here, translated into MacIntyre's vocabulary, is that most people can lead what for them is a good life only in the context of well-functioning practices. It is only in such a context that they can "take pride in being good at something specific," and this pride rests on the achievement of internal goods and the development of the virtues. As MacIntyre makes clear,16 and Sennett implies, practices presuppose, in turn, what MacIntyre calls the narrative unity of a human life ("a sustaining life narrative," as Sennett calls it) and the presence of a tradition (that is why people "value the experiences they've lived through," in Sennett's words).

If Sennett is correct, a more serious charge must be leveled at "the culture of the new capitalism" for building into the social setting for individual autonomy and the socialization of autonomous subjects a model of an "ideal man or woman" that goes against the nature of "most people." It is not just that people are made autonomous to live a kind of life *others* may have reason to find ethically wanting; it is rather that they are forced to be autonomous in a way to which they themselves would take exception given the opportunity. This is domination in the guise of autonomy, or autonomy created in the spirit of domination. That this is true of "most people" but not necessarily of all only confirms that the social setting for individual autonomy is determined, in the liberal societies covered by Sennett's generalization, by grossly unequal relations of power. Those at the receiving end of such unequal heteronomous determination— "most people"—naturally suffer damage as capitalism's new cultural ideal is burned into the very conditions and conditioning of their individual autonomy.

Speculative as it may sound, Sennett's claim, made in the context of an empirical study of the culture of the new capitalism, is well worth the attention of all those who truly care about individual autonomy. Complementing those authors who alert us to the corporate determination of the social setting for individual autonomy, Sennett succeeds at least in casting reasonable doubt on the ethical failings of that setting.

<sup>14</sup> See Sennett, *The Culture of the New Capitalism*, 12 for his claim that this cutting-edge or as yet minority phenomenon is a basis for "inferring the culture of the whole."

<sup>15</sup> Sennett, *The Culture of the New Capitalism*, 5. 16 See MacIntyre, *After Virtue*, ch. 15.

## **III. Griffin on Liberty Rights**

I have argued that liberty rights are too strong as human rights, and that they are too weak as liberal rights. With regard to the first claim, it will be helpful to supplement my general argument with a specific example of the kind of view at which this argument is directed. With regard to the second claim, it will be helpful to illustrate, again with a specific example, what I have in mind by liberalism's failure to take up the challenge of redeeming individual autonomy. To both ends, we can hardly do better than examine James Griffin's widely respected treatment of liberty rights.

Griffin finds the basis for human rights in the notion of normative agency. According to him, there are three necessary conditions for normative agency, namely, autonomy, liberty, and minimum provision (or welfare), and thus the protection of these conditions requires three "highest-level human rights."17 Of these, the rights that cater respectively to autonomy and liberty make up what are commonly lumped together as liberty rights.18

Griffin readily acknowledges that the "human" in "human rights" is not a straightforward statement of fact about human beings, and he does so in order to preempt the charge of deriving "ought" from "is" statements. Rather, "my notions of 'human nature' and 'human agent' are already well within the normative circle, and there is no obvious fallacy involved in deriving rights from notions as evaluatively rich as they are" (35). This immediately prompts a question about the basis and provenance of such evaluatively rich notions. As one might expect, the basis and provenance of these notions, and thus the notions themselves, cannot but belong to a *particular* conception of what it means to be "human." This becomes obvious when Griffin defines agency as a matter of "deliberating, assessing, choosing, and acting to make what we see as a good life for ourselves" (32). As anyone familiar with the moral universe of modern liberalism will recognize, the language of deliberation and choice already builds the liberal preference for a particular kind of individualism and autonomy into what should be a more open, elastic, and hence more generally applicable notion of human agency as required by any unprejudiced concept of human rights. The notion of human agency couched in this liberal vocabulary is a gloss not on being "human" but on *being "human" in a particular way*.

It is precisely the attempt to specify being "human" in a particular way that makes unavoidable what Griffin calls an "evaluatively substantive" account (174). It can be readily inferred from this account that the correct or best (particular) way of being "human" is the liberal way. In fact, Griffin comes close to saying as much when he speaks of the "spread of the largely *Western-inspired* discourse of human rights that we have witnessed over the last sixty years" (26, emphasis added) and explicitly traces this discourse in turn to the Enlightenment (1–2). In the process of defending this Western-inspired view, Griffin is quite right to mention "a sense in which persecution can even enhance agency," in that "when Alexander Solzhenitsyn was sent to a gulag,

<sup>17</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 149. Hereinafter cited parenthetically by page number only.

<sup>18</sup> Throughout I use "liberty rights" as a general term that covers what Griffin distinguishes as autonomy and liberty.

he seems to have become a more focused and determined agent than ever," and then immediately to reject this as a reason for concluding that agency needs no protection. But he is surely mistaken to treat this as following simply from a larger notion of agency: "My somewhat *ampler* picture is of a self-decider (ie, someone autonomous) who, within limits, is not blocked from pursuing his or her conception of a worthwhile life (ie, someone also at liberty). If either autonomy or liberty is missing, one's agency, on this *ampler* interpretation, is deficient" (46, emphasis added). It seems to me that if we cannot draw any conclusion in favor of persecution from the case of Solzhenitsyn, it is because there is no evidence that persecution *generally* enhances agency or *generally* promotes better and more intense forms of agency than is possible without persecution. Were the facts of the matter otherwise, we would do well to think again.

We should be worried if normative agency already means, substantively, a kind of agency that rules out whatever agency happens to be enhanced, for however few or many people, by persecution. For this would be to equate human agency with a *particular* kind of human agency. There is, of course, nothing at all amiss with advancing a particular conception of normative agency—with operating from the very beginning, as Griffin puts it, "well within the normative circle" (35). The only thing one cannot hope to accomplish within such a normative circle, which is by nature particular, is a set of rights general or universal enough to be properly *human* rights. Just as being "human" in a particular way fails, as we saw earlier, to properly capture what is "human" in "human rights," so a particular kind of normative agency cannot serve as a suitable foundation for such rights as the rights indispensable to all human agents.

Although Griffin discusses liberty rights as human rights, he does so in the context of trying to provide a theoretical foundation for such rights, and there is no reason to think that this *foundation* for liberty rights as human rights would, for Griffin, be any different from a foundation for liberty rights as liberal rights. Aside from the question of whether liberty rights are fit to be human rights, liberty rights themselves need an adequate spelling out so that we can understand how strong liberty rights need to be if they are to make good the rationale that gives them their special meaning and importance. In this spirit it is worth considering whether liberty rights as conceived by Griffin are strong enough as liberal rights.

One is initially encouraged by Griffin's avowed aim to find "the notion of human rights that fits into the best ethics that we can establish" (2) and by his correspondingly unequivocal desire to have his proposal assessed "ultimately, by deciding whether it gives us human rights that fit into the best ethics overall" (4). When Griffin proceeds to place the dignity of the human person at the center of this ethics and to understand this dignity in terms of normative agency, however, what we get is a veritable reduction of ethics to autonomy. It comes to me as a surprise, I must confess, that Griffin's notion of normative agency is so undemanding as to be almost *ethically* empty: it is just "the agency involved in living a worthwhile life" (45), where what counts as a worthwhile life is left almost entirely open and unrestricted, and this not due to oversight but as a matter of principle. As Griffin typically puts it, "What we attach value to, what we regard as giving dignity to human life, is our capacity to choose and to pursue our conception of a worthwhile life" (44). It is because nothing substantive is required of what is called a worthwhile life that Griffin is able to say, with little need for argument, that "Normative agency is the typical human condition" (45).19

Griffin seems to be suggesting that what is normative in normative agency is entirely a matter of having and exercising the capacity to choose and pursue what a human agent considers a worthwhile life, within the enormously wide range of what is permissible. There are no further conditions to be satisfied beyond this largely formal requirement, and hence no conditions regarding either the content of a worthwhile life or the conduct of such a life in terms of the virtues. If it is nevertheless possible to accept this characterization as one of *normative* agency, it is difficult to see how normative agency so thinly and undemandingly conceived can support the weighty burden of dignity. Surely, for normative agents to have dignity, they must live in ways that carry dignity over and above the mere fact that they have chosen to live thus.20

If Griffin is almost entirely permissive with regard to the content of autonomous choices, he is very demanding, and rightly so, with regard to what autonomy as sheer self-direction involves. This is most explicit in Griffin's explanation of the distinction between autonomy and liberty in terms of their different enemies:

Autonomy and liberty are different values. And their enemies are different. The enemies of autonomy are indoctrination, brain-washing, domination, manipulation, conformity, conventionality, false consciousness, certain forms of immaturity . . .One can be at liberty but not autonomous—say, so conventionally raised that, without thought, one falls in with society's values, but is free to pursue them as one wishes (151).

What we find here is an unusually perspicacious appreciation of what autonomy, to be worthy of its name, must require and how difficult it is for individuals to live up to its requirements and for a society to provide an environment free of excessive obstacles to meeting them. Griffin seems even to imply a distinction not unlike mine between individual autonomy and its social setting.

By the standard implicit in the quoted passage, most members of any liberal society are free but not autonomous. Since socialization not of one's own choosing is a condition of subjecthood, some "indoctrination" or "brain-washing" is unavoidable as a precondition of all subjects, even the most autonomous. The question therefore is not whether "indoctrination" is present but what kind of "indoctrination" is acceptable, or, in other words, how well the unavoidable "indoctrination" is redeemed politically and ethically. If we examine what happens in liberal societies, however, we shall find that the "indoctrination" that is part of the very creation of autonomous subjects and of the social setting for individual autonomy is not redeemed but rather made largely invisible. It is a sign of the successful production of this invisibility that most people

<sup>19</sup> It is worth noting, though obvious, that Griffin's view is widely shared among contemporary liberal philosophers, most notably John Rawls. See, eg, Rawls's discussion of "the basis of equality" in *A Theory of Justice*, rev. edn. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), section 77.

<sup>20</sup> It does not follow, of course, that in the absence of such dignity human agents cannot be entitled to autonomy and liberty on other grounds. One such ground, refreshingly honest though not particularly uplifting, is available in what John Skorupski labels "populism." See his *Ethical Explorations* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 194.

learn to conform and do so with such ease that they think of themselves as acting of their own free will rather than in accordance with the conventional values and preferences which they have picked up with little reflection. Lulled to sleep by the invisibility of the "enemies of autonomy," we sink into the comfortable illusion that a society can be free of indoctrination altogether and a liberal society, despite its imperfections, is close to being such a society. And so we forget that all individual autonomy and autonomous subjectivity have their necessary antecedents in "indoctrination," and that therefore "indoctrination" is something that cannot be eliminated but must instead be redeemed. Without conscientious and continual efforts at such redemption, along with the vigilance required by such efforts, liberal societies make short shrift of the value of individual autonomy.

Such a conclusion is unavoidable if we take seriously Griffin's rightly stringent understanding of autonomy; why else would one invoke this value and call it autonomy in the first place? As it turns out, however, Griffin names "the enemies of autonomy" only to set a very low standard for their elimination in his subsequent discussion:

What human rights guarantee is that one be able to live the life of a normative agent. In a society with an ample range of options, if one cannot realize one conception, there are others: other lives that one can also value and that can become fully worthwhile lives for one to live . . .And generally one can find fulfillment in various sorts of lives. For the many of whom this is true, there is equality of opportunity on a more general level: not equal opportunity to achieve any particular conception of a worthwhile life that one might choose, but equal opportunity to make a good life for oneself. *So long as the various ground floors guaranteed by human rights are in place, the obstacles to making a good life are likely to be deep inside oneself*, beyond the reach of others (163, emphasis added).

What human rights patently cannot guarantee, as we have seen, are the right kind of social setting for individual autonomy and the good kind of autonomous subject. Think of the workplace as it has evolved in what Sennett calls "the culture of the new capitalism." Is it at all obvious that one has only oneself to blame in such a setting if one fails to make a good life for oneself, as long as one's human rights are not violated, and as long as "the culture of the new capitalism" does not entail such violation (as it clearly does not)? Is it not more plausible to think, rather, that the social setting for individual autonomy and the socialization of autonomous subjects that have led to the "corrosion of character" are increasingly preventing ordinary men and women of "character" from living a worthwhile life as they reasonably see it?

I am not sure if Griffin is responding to the state of affairs addressed by these questions when he writes: "Liberty is not a right to a worthwhile life itself, but merely a right to pursue it with *no more impediments than those imposed by mother nature*, including, prominently, human nature" (168, emphasis added), or when he writes: "In general, *we must simply accept, and build our lives from, the range of options with which fortune has endowed us*. Society cannot do much to alter it, and the life of a normative agent does not require more than this" (163, emphasis added). What is missing in these remarks is the crucial distinction between "the range of options with which fortune has endowed us" and the range of options that is the result of groups of human beings each trying to shape the structure and ethos of their society in one way rather than another through never-ending struggles for the preservation and preeminence of their kind. The dominant form of society in the world today—liberal democratic capitalism—is one such result. There will be something deeply deficient about liberty rights, by liberalism's own standard, if such rights can do little to redress those limits to options of the good life that are imposed in this way, unless liberals are ready to admit (and this would be a very significant admission indeed) that their attachment to the value of individual autonomy does not extend to the determination of the social setting in which this value is exercised. In this light, Griffin's caution against asking too much of liberty rights would make good sense only on the understanding that the heteronomous production of the antecedent conditions and subjects of individual autonomy has been properly redeemed.21

I have taken issue, then, with Griffin's notion of normative agency for being a *particular*, liberal conception of human agency and for being overly *permissive* with regard to ethics. I should now explain how the particularity and the permissiveness come together, and what this seemingly odd combination signifies. It is useful to begin by noting that the concept of what Marx would call "egoistic man" (as the subject of "the rights of man") is replaced in our prevailing, liberal understanding of civil society or the private sphere by that of a moral agent who, as Rawls puts it, pursues the interest of a self which need not be an interest in oneself. All the same, the conceptual possibility of genuine engagement with interests much wider than one's own which is left open by Rawls's distinction is severely limited if not foreclosed by the historical process in which, to use Marx's terminology, the political state came to be separated from civil society. This is a process in which, as Marx puts it, "the bonds which [in the feudal order] had restrained the egoistic spirit of civil society were removed along with the political yoke." The upshot of this process comprises at once the "consummation of the idealism of the state," in the shape of what we now call democracy, and the "consummation of the materialism of civil society," in the shape of the rights of individuals to pursue their private interests as they see fit.22 It is no accident that the abstract interest of a self has turned out to be, for the most part, a concrete interest in one's own atomistic self, in property, security, and individual happiness, and thus ethical permissiveness is constitutive of a particular conception of the good life.

When we speak of human rights today, then, the rights in question are not the rights of the human being as such but the rights of the human being as shaped in a particular way by a particular historical process. It is this *particular* human being who is the bearer of what we call human rights. If this is so, then the rise of human rights and the function and meaning of such rights must be understood as part of this historical process. This is not changed in any way by the fact that human rights are meant

<sup>21</sup> To see to such redemption, not only do we need an account of rights, human or liberal, that fits into the best ethics available, we also need an ethics that fits into the best understanding of the most important features and patterns of development of a liberal democratic society. This is why I have found it necessary to go beyond philosophy's typical abstract normative theorizing and seek help from the work of scholars who tell us what our societies are like.

<sup>22</sup> Karl Marx, "On the Jewish Question," in Robert C. Tucker (ed.), *The Marx–Engels Reader*, 2nd edn. (New York: W. W. Norton, 1978), 45.

to be available to every human being on an equal footing, that indeed the language of human rights is the language of equality. Rather, this fact reminds us to ask the question of "equality among what kind of human beings," a deeper question than "equality of what."23 Just as there is no human being as such, so there is no equality as such. The same historical process that has resulted in the formation of a particular kind of human being, the modern possessive and increasingly consuming individual, has also given rise to a particular value of equality that is applicable to such beings. Thus it is ultimately for such individuals that equality has come to be what Ronald Dworkin calls the sovereign virtue of our modern world.24 It is such individuals who are of equal importance and who are the bearers of special responsibility each for himself or herself.

### **IV. Liberty Rights beyond Liberal Democracy**

If I am roughly correct about liberty rights being too strong as human rights and too weak as liberal rights, a satisfactory explanation for this strange awkwardness is bound to tell us something important about liberty rights. Liberty rights, as we have seen, fall considerably short of the ambition of self-determination that informs them, and this is true even in the most liberal of liberal societies. Small wonder, then, that when liberty rights are transplanted from a liberal society to the international arena as human rights, they must suffer a further weakening, since human rights are meant to apply to all human beings and must therefore have a minimalist character.25 What is at work in both cases is a liberal moral vision that stands in the way of the full working out of liberal rights. This liberal moral vision has as its outer limits a comprehensive ordering of human life in which prominently figures the capitalist organization of production and consumption and, given the central importance of both, in effect of society as a whole.

These outer limits of the liberal moral vision are responsible both for the mistake of propagating liberty rights as human rights and for the largely opposite mistake of stopping well short of the potential of liberty rights when treated as liberal rights. The latter mistake, as we have seen, involves attaching great importance to individual autonomy without taking the logical next step of attaching equal importance to the determination of the social setting for, and of the subjects of, individual autonomy. Given how obvious this mistake is and yet how commonly it is made, I am inclined to think of it as a motivated blind spot: if you set great store by the value of autonomy and yet, in spelling out what it means and requires, do not follow its inner logic to its proper conclusion, with no explanation of why you stop short in this way, this gives one reason to think that you are not motivated to go all the way. Why not? Because you have no problem with the way in which the social setting for, and the subjects of,

<sup>23</sup> A particularly incisive treatment of this question can be found in Christoph Menke, *Reflections of Equality*, trans. Howard Rouse and Andrei Denejkine (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006), 22–33.

<sup>24</sup> See Ronald Dworkin, *Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000).

<sup>25</sup> On the rationale for the minimalist character to human rights, see Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 34, 45, 156.

individual autonomy are actually determined. You have no problem, that is, with the determination of individual autonomy by the capitalist order. You value autonomy, to be sure, and value it greatly, but you are happy or at least prepared to exercise autonomy and have others exercise autonomy under constraints imposed by the capitalist organization of economic and social life. That is why you are not interested in following the inner logic of autonomy to its proper conclusion.26 When we understand liberty rights, whether as liberal or human rights, as being informed by the moral vision of liberal democracy, then, we must in turn understand liberal democracy itself as standing in a relationship of mutual accommodation and transformation with capitalism. And thus we must understand liberty rights as advancing the cause of human well-being within limits set by the capitalist order.27

It is liberty rights thus determined and constrained that serve as the prototype of liberty rights as human rights. As I have tried to show, it is a mistake to treat liberty rights as human rights: if liberty rights as typically understood in the context of a liberal democratic society are too weak, they are too strong as human rights. This mistake has its explanation in the same liberal moral vision that is responsible for the opposite mistake, with only one additional and very important factor to be mentioned, namely, the liberal attempt to extend a duly extenuated version of its moral vision to the international arena especially in the post-Cold War era of global capitalism. I believe Samuel Moyn is entirely correct in characterizing the human rights movement in terms of "the last utopia."28 This utopia envisions a vastly better *world* than we have now—*one* world, in that all societies in it respect and protect human rights. But rather than being truly responsive to the diverse conditions and traditions in different parts of the world, this vision rests on the conviction that the combination of liberal democracy and capitalism represents the best available organization of economic, political, and social life *everywhere*. If this did not seem so unequivocally the case in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, there can be little doubt now, given how the Cold War ended with the economic and ideological triumph of liberal democratic capitalism. Since the end of the Cold War, capitalist

26 The inner logic of autonomy is, in this context, social or political, not metaphysical, and one can therefore steer clear of the question of free will versus determinism in the way, say, Philip Pettit does in *A Theory of Freedom: From the Psychology to the Politics of Agency* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). Thus understood, "autonomy" is the name of a humanly constructed way of life, with its distinctive practices of self-constitution, in which individuals are allowed, indeed compelled, to determine their own lives. To follow the inner logic of autonomy to its proper conclusion is thus to make it possible for individuals to determine their own lives as much as is humanly possible and meaningful, not on the basis of any metaphysical belief in libertarian free will but according to the social or political value of autonomy itself. By the same token, compatibilism cannot provide any reason to care about determining one's own life within a given social setting but not to care about taking a humanly possible and meaningful part in co-determining that setting.

27 To say of the human rights movement that it operates largely within the parameters of the capitalist order is not to suggest, however, that what this movement helps to achieve is something that can be taken for granted as the natural outcome of the capitalist system. The capitalist system must be pushed, and pushed very hard, to turn into reality what is otherwise merely structurally possible within it. The human rights movement, especially when it fights simultaneously for liberty rights and welfare rights, is a very important part of that hard pushing. As such, it is the human face—the conscience—of (global) capitalism.

28 Samuel Moyn, *The Last Utopia: Human Rights in History* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010).

globalization has assumed an altogether new momentum and scale, and this has made necessary and seemingly natural, in the realm of values, the new moral universalism and political internationalism as embodied in the concept of human rights. The significance of the minimalist character of human rights in this context may be less immediately apparent, but this much is obvious enough, that moral universalism and political internationalism already dictate a certain minimalism, aided by an ideological climate in which the demise of communism has caused all but the tiniest minority to avoid like plague any form of moral maximalism. Thus, when liberty rights once again enter the international arena as human rights, it is entirely predictable that they will largely retain their shape and meaning as liberal rights, so that any society that effectively introduces such rights will become more like a liberal society. And it follows from this, and from the already compromised status of liberty rights in a liberal society, that liberty rights as human rights must suffer the double incoherence of being both too weak (by the measure of their rationale) and too strong (thanks to their misguided universality).

To take issue with liberty rights in the way I have done throughout is not to argue against liberty rights. It is rather to suggest that, to be coherent and true to their own rationale, liberty rights must be made stronger by redeeming the heteronomous determination of the social setting for, and the subjects of, individual autonomy. With this step duly accomplished, we may go a step further and allow liberty rights to re-enter the international arena, as part of a perfectly legitimate proposal for making the world a better place, but no longer as human rights as we now understand them, for no plausible conception of objectively minimal requirements for human status can treat liberty rights as necessary conditions. For these two steps to be taken, liberal democratic societies as we now find them will have to undergo a major transformation, as the conditions for individual autonomy will have to cease to be determined by a capitalist mode of production together with which liberal democracy has so far formed a comprehensive economic, political, and social arrangement. It is only after such a transformation that liberty rights will no longer figure in any dubious project of changing the world in the image of the liberal democratic capitalist order.

This is a very tall order indeed, something we can only approach in the spirit of a new utopia. There is nothing in human nature that need render such a utopia implausible; whether it is realistic (to use Rawls's term), given the way the world has come to be and its sedimentation in human "second" nature, is another matter. If this utopia of genuine autonomy is implausible, or so we believe, then we must own up to the incoherence of the liberal ambition of a society (and world) made up of autonomous agents and to the hopelessness of trying to realize such an ambition. We must own up, that is, to the fact that the autonomy we cherish is no more than a certain room for individual maneuver whose range of choices and outer limits are determined by a capitalist order that has no concern for individual autonomy, or for any other human good for that matter, unless it is instrumental to the profitability and expansion of capital. If this is what we mean by autonomy, we should, in the interest of accuracy and honesty, consider dropping this term—or else spell out the qualifications every time we use it.

More importantly, we will be well advised to reconsider the very rationale for individual autonomy thus determined and compromised. Nothing is more difficult, and more fraught with ideological traps and temptations, than an attempt to fix the level of liberty rights, whether as liberal rights or human rights. And nothing is more revealing or symptomatic than how one settles on a particular level or minimum and how one goes about justifying it—the more so as the attempt is actually doomed to incoherence from the start. If we really care about liberty, we should care about autonomy, and if we really care about autonomy rather than its mere semblance, then we just cannot rest content with the exercise of individual autonomy without bothering to examine the determination—insofar as such determination is carried out by human beings, in however complex a manner, and its outcome could be otherwise—of the social setting for, and of the subjects of, individual autonomy. It is a slippery slope, so to speak, and there is no natural stopping-place until we follow the inner logic of the value of autonomy to its proper conclusion. To stop before we reach this proper conclusion is to stop for reasons other than autonomy. In that case, we might as well settle for less than what we mistakenly regard as autonomy. At least we will have no moral vantage point from which to take issue with those who do if they themselves feel comfortable with it—and most definitely no such vantage point afforded by professed belief in autonomy.

In the end, I believe that liberty rights are among the truly indispensable inventions of the modern moral and political imagination—indispensable not for living but for flourishing under modern conditions of life. But I believe with equal conviction that the rationale and full potential of liberty rights can be made good only if we look beyond the exercise of individual autonomy to its social determination. I labor under no illusions as to the enormity of the task of redeeming the heteronomy of such determination. But all my realism cannot persuade me that philosophers who rightly set such great store by liberty rights, especially autonomy, are not at least intellectually obligated to spell out the inner logic of autonomy and pursue that logic to its proper conclusion before they can speak with reasonable confidence about liberty rights as liberal rights or with respect to the international arena.