---
title: "Free Speech as an Inverted Right and Democratic Persuasion"
author:
  - name: "Corey Brettschneider"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "359–378"
citation_key: "brettschneider2015speech"
---

## [PART III](#page-8-4) [CANONICAL AND CONTESTED](#page-8-4)  [HUMAN RIGHTS](#page-8-4)

## <span id="page-375-0"></span> [Free Speech as an Inverted Right](#page-8-5)  [and Democratic Persuasion*](#page-8-5)

#### *Corey Brettschneider*

According to Elizabeth Anderson and Richard Pildes, rights should be understood, not as based on the interests of the individual, but rather as delineated by the expressive capacities of the state.1 The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution for example, which bars "endorsement" of religion by the state can be best understood in terms of what the state should or should not express. By this account, a cross in a public school classroom is problematic because it suggests that the state is endorsing Christianity. According to the "expressivist" view, it is a mistake to think that we should understand why the cross would be problematic by looking to the interests of the students. None of these students are coerced directly, nor are their interests obviously affected. They may, for instance, simply ignore the cross. Instead, displaying the cross in a public school classroom is problematic for the expressivists because it violates what Anderson and Pildes regard as the state's fundamental identity; it implies that the state is Christian. Anderson and Pildes helpfully demonstrate that issues concerning religious establishment are linked to what the state should or should not say when it "speaks." Inevitably, the state will express a message in many circumstances. It is unrealistic that classrooms, for instance, could entirely avoid conveying any state message. Rather the issue, as expressivists demonstrate, is what the state should say, given that it will unavoidably express itself.

I do not wish to dispute Anderson's and Pildes' influential account of the Establishment Clause here. Instead I want to discuss a kind of problem that can arise in the tension between state expression and the protection of negative rights against coercive intervention. This problem is distinct from Anderson's and Pildes' focus on direct state expression relevant to the Establishment Clause, so it is not surprising that their theory does not address it.2 The right to be free from state coercion in matters of individual expression requires a distinct kind of expressivist theory, because the way that the state conveys its message in protecting free speech is inevitably more ambiguous than in the Establishment Clause context. What is distinctive about the

<sup>*</sup> Part of this essay reprises verbatim selections from my book, *When the State Speaks, What Should it Say? How Democracies can Protect Expression and Promote Equality* (Princeton, 2012) and my article 'Born Free, But Not Indifferent', published at [http://foreignpolicy.com.](http://foreignpolicy.com)

<sup>1</sup> Elizabeth Anderson and Richard Pildes, "Expressive Theories of Law: A General Restatement," *University of Pennsylvania Law Review*, 148 (2000): 1503–75.

<sup>2</sup> My focus is on the right to free speech, but a similar analysis might be given of other negative rights like the right to privacy.

jurisprudence of the rights related to the Establishment Clause is that it concerns direct limits on what the state can say. To the extent that citizens have a right against the establishment of religion, they possess a right against the state endorsing a particular religion. In the Establishment context, the relationship between state expression and rights is perfectly congruent: the citizen's right against establishment of religion correlates with the state's duty not to establish a religion.

Rights to freedom of expression, however, differ in a key sense. In the free speech context, I argue, state expression can at times seem to be "inverted" when rights are used to protect speech that opposes the reasons for the right to free expression itself. For example, the state's protection of free speech rights for hate groups might appear to suggest that there should be no judgment about the racist content of the protected expression. In this sense, there is a possible tension between the implicit message of speech protections and the reasons that are rightly understood to underlie those protections. Given the possible confusion that inverted rights present for the successful promulgation of the reasons for rights, any workable theory of free expression should explain how the state might overcome this challenge.

I also suggest that my account of democracy, which I call "value democracy," offers an original answer to the challenge of inverted rights. It argues that the state should protect rights against coercion in a neutral manner, but that it should not be neutral regarding the values expressed by hateful viewpoints. The state needs to clarify its democratic values due to the risk that state protection of hateful viewpoints might be seen as condoning them. In other words, there is a risk that in protecting the right to express hateful viewpoints the liberal democratic state will be viewed as complicit in these viewpoints. Value democracy's solution to the problem of inverted rights then is for the state to protect the right to free speech in regard to coercion, while at the same time criticizing hateful or discriminatory viewpoints in its various non-coercive expressive capacities. The state should engage in democratic persuasion, criticizing hate speech, and promulgating the reasons for rights. Democratic persuasion thus solves the problem of inverted rights by pronouncing the state's criticism of protected but hateful viewpoints. In this way, democratic persuasion serves as a necessary complement to the rights protected under the doctrine of viewpoint neutrality.

#### **I. The Inverted Structure of Hate Speech Protections**

Some theorists of free speech think that government condemnation of actions requires outlawing such actions. Such theories have appeal because the structure of viewpoint neutral free speech protections permits acts of expression at odds with the reasons for free speech in the first place. This has seemed to some an untenable paradox where free speech seems to allow for the flourishing of views that would undermine liberal democracy in the first place. This is the thought behind the adage that liberals are people who "can't take their own side in an argument." In this section I begin by examining how such theories suggest that inverted rights are untenable. I then explain how value democracy and my account of democratic persuasion offer a way to clarify inverted rights without government coercion.

I begin with the view of critical race theorist Charles Lawrence, who in turn draws on the work of Richard Delgado. Lawrence believes that the state is always acting in its expressive capacities because all state action, including coercive action, is backed by reasons and value judgments. For instance, Lawrence views the decisions to desegregate lunch counters and to prohibit signs barring entry to African Americans as themselves expressions of the state's support for the values of equal citizenship.3 Lawrence takes this approach to argue that the state should use criminal law to limit hate speech and prosecute hate groups. He points out, as have I, that hate groups directly threaten the basic values of a free society and that the state must therefore clearly condemn these groups. Lawrence's approach, however, differs from my own in suggesting that the state should express its condemnation of hate groups through criminal law. Lawrence, like Catherine MacKinnon, rejects the doctrine of viewpoint neutrality in favor of a balancing approach to issues of equal protection and civil rights.4

The problem with Lawrence's account is that it does not recognize the distinction between the type of values expressed when the state acts in its expressive capacities and the type of values expressed when the state protects the speech of citizens and groups within society. For instance, when the state bans murder in criminal law, it is clearly expressing the idea that murder violates the rules of a legitimate society. Anti-discrimination law functions similarly; it expresses disapproval of the inegalitarian treatment of citizens. But not all decisions about coercion are similar. If the state protects a Klansman's right not to be murdered, it does not express support for the Klan's values, nor is it neutral about the Klan's beliefs. On the contrary, the state that protects the Klansman from murder is acknowledging that citizens are entitled to rights in virtue of their being citizens, even when their viewpoints are deeply illiberal. Thus it does not follow from the state's protection of the lives of Klan members that the state endorses the viewpoints of these speakers. Similarly, the state protects the Klan members' right to expression for reasons related to respect for the liberal principles of freedom, although these values are rejected in the content of the Klan members' speech.

Lawrence's critique, despite its inability to differentiate between the types of values expressed when the state acts in its two distinct capacities, is nevertheless helpful in forcing liberal theory to clarify its reasons for refusing to regulate illiberal expression. When the state refrains from regulating illiberal viewpoints, it is essential that it also use its expressive capacities to clarify that it is not expressing support for the viewpoints themselves. The state is instead guaranteeing an entitlement that stems from the need to respect all citizens as free and equal. In my account, the state can clarify the relationship between the rights and the reasons behind rights by clearly condemning hateful political viewpoints while protecting them from coercive law.

Without this clarification, there is a significant risk that the real meaning of the protection of free expression will be inverted. Because free speech rights often protect

<sup>3</sup> Charles Lawrence, "If He Hollers Let Him Go: Racist Speech on Campus," in Mari J. Matsuda and Charles R. Lawrence, III (eds.), *Words That Wound: Critical Race Theory, Assaultive Speech, And The First Amendment* (New York: Westview Press, 1993), 53–88.

<sup>4</sup> Catharine MacKinnon, *Only Words* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), see in particular ch. 3, "Equality and Speech."

messages at odds with the liberal democrat state's own foundational values, there is a risk that the state might be seen to endorse or to be indifferent to messages that challenge its very foundation. For Lawrence and others this potentially self-contradictory message is untenable. Thus free speech rights must be limited to disallow messages that are at odds with the expression of the state's own core values.

Consider the Court's opinion in *Virginia v. Black*.5 In this case, the Court held that cross-burning was protected during a rally in which no member of the targeted class was singled out. Although the Court allowed for the possibility of an exception to the requirement of content neutrality in the instance of a threat to particular individuals, it did not think that the rally constituted such a threat. The Court invoked its doctrine of content neutrality, which includes but is not limited to the doctrine of viewpoint neutrality. The important point for our purposes is that the protected "speech" in this case—the burning of the cross—clearly opposes the normative reasons that underlie its legality in the first place. The Klan's message, as the Court pointed out, is in opposition, for instance, to the ideal of equality under law enshrined in the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

To bring into clearer relief the idea of inverted rights, it is helpful to further develop the ways that the viewpoint of protected speech might conflict with the underlying "reasons for rights" that undergird the doctrines of viewpoint and content neutrality. To illustrate, consider how John Rawls, Ronald Dworkin, and Alexander Meiklejohn connect viewpoint neutrality with a wider set of values that are required for political legitimacy, in particular what I refer to as the value of free and equal citizenship.

In developing this argument it is helpful to begin with the value-based defenses of viewpoint neutrality developed by Rawls, Dworkin, and Meiklejohn. According to Rawls, political equality requires a respect for the "two moral powers" of all citizens to develop and exercise what he calls a "capacity for a sense of justice" and a "capacity for a conception of the good."6 Citizens must be free from coercive threat as they develop their own notion of justice and the good. Otherwise, they would not be able to affirm and choose their own ideas about the most fundamental matters of politics (the just) and what constitutes, in their view, a valuable life (the good). Rawls' argument could be interpreted to support viewpoint neutrality, because the value of equality would be violated if some but not all citizens were free to develop their moral powers. Government discrimination or non-neutrality among viewpoints would make respect for the exercise of the moral powers unequal and would deny political freedom to the coerced citizens. Non-neutrality would undermine the equal treatment, not only of the citizens whose viewpoints were banned, but also of the citizens who otherwise could have listened to and argued with those viewpoints. The state would undermine equal treatment by failing to respect the capacity of citizens to make the free decision to accept or reject any viewpoint. Viewpoint neutrality is therefore necessary for the full and equal exercise of the two moral powers of citizens.7

5 538 US 343 (2003).

6 John Rawls, *Political Liberalism*, rev. edn. (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005) lecture 8, esp. 302, 332, 334–5.

7 Rawls endorses viewpoint neutrality in *Political Liberalism*, 336: "So long as the advocacy of revolutionary and even seditious doctrines is fully protected, as it should be, there is no restriction on the content of political speech, but only regulations as to time and place, and the means used to express it." However,

A similar line of egalitarian justification for this doctrine can be found in the work of Dworkin and Meiklejohn. These thinkers can be seen as defending viewpoint neutrality in the right of free expression, even for the hateful viewpoints held by the Nazis and the Klan, because neutrality is required to respect the democratic autonomy of citizens to develop their own political opinions.8 Meiklejohn famously employs the metaphor of a town meeting to argue that all viewpoints must be protected in a democracy. On his view, while the moderator of a town meeting could limit speakers based on relevance and time constraints, censorship based on the content would compromise the meeting's democratic aims. Such censorship would prevent participants from hearing a variety of arguments for and against the measure under consideration, and would constrain their ability to express their own views. This kind of censorship would impede the ability of citizens to be the source of their own democratic decisions and would therefore undermine the democratic ideal.

Like Rawls, Meiklejohn argues that any attempt to discriminate based on the content of a particular viewpoint would threaten a regime's democratic credentials, even if the viewpoint in question were deeply undemocratic. Coercively limiting or banning an illiberal viewpoint would prevent citizens from actively affirming the core values of democracy. According to this argument, we must have the option to consider and reject all values, even democratic ones, in order to be truly free to affirm them. As Ronald Dworkin puts it, "a majority decision is not fair unless everyone has had a fair opportunity to express his or her attitudes or opinions or fears or tastes or presuppositions or prejudices or ideals, not just in the hope of influencing others, though that hope is crucially important, but also just to confirm his or her standing as a responsible agent in, rather than a passive victim of, collective action."9 In short, the right to hear and make political arguments is a fundamental component of equal citizenship. Viewpoint neutrality should therefore not be confused with a justification for free speech; it is rather a doctrine that offers guidance regarding whether it is appropriate to limit coercion.

One might ask, however, whether it is empirically necessary for citizens to have the option to choose inegalitarian principles to develop Rawls' two moral powers or to deliberate about policy. Perhaps individuals living under censorship would select the same policy views and conceptions of justice and the good that they would choose living under freedom. However, I do not read the defenders of viewpoint neutrality as making an empirical argument, but rather as presenting a claim about what it means to respect citizens as free and equal. It is not that the protection of all viewpoints is empirically necessary to develop the two moral powers or the capacities for democratic citizenship. Rather, such protection from hateful viewpoints would disrespect the independent judgment of free and equal citizens, regarded as having the two moral powers, if the state were to restrict their options. Even if citizens ought not to choose views that are at odds with an ideal of equal citizenship, it is essential to the

the literature on Rawls is divided over whether viewpoint neutrality extends to hate speech, since he does not address the issue explicitly in his work. See Samuel Freeman, *Rawls* (New York: Routledge, 2007), 72.

<sup>8</sup> This view of democratic autonomy corresponds with one of Rawls' moral powers, the capacity for a sense of justice.

<sup>9</sup> Dworkin, "A New Map of Censorship," *Index on Censorship*, 35 (February 2006): 131.

legitimacy of value democracy that they *could* choose to embrace inegalitarian principles and policies.10

Much of my emphasis, and that of the familiar free speech tradition following John Stuart Mill, is on the problems posed by coercive or criminal bans on speech. Such bans are blunt instruments with harmful effects. As Mill reminds us, coercive bans risk the loss of partial truths that might, as part of public discourse, serve to enlighten, despite being couched in arguments that are generally wrong.11 Coercive sanction merely tries to bury opinion and therefore misses the grievances that might be held legitimately even by those with deeply racist views.12 Mill reminds us, too, that coercive sanction denies citizens the opportunity to clarify what is wrong with hateful views.13 As Nancy Rosenblum argues, it also has the potential to force these views underground.14 It would be better for hateful viewpoints to be publicly seen, tracked, and refuted.

I have sought to emphasize why value democracy's defense of viewpoint neutrality should be couched in a wider non-value neutral concern to protect the core values of freedom and equality, which a legitimate society must respect. It follows from the grounding of viewpoint neutrality in a wider non-neutral theory that the legitimate state can and should protect some views that are at odds with its own core values. A ban on certain viewpoints would disrespect the moral powers of free and equal citizens because it would, through threat of punishment, force people to come to particular conclusions about politics.

However, there is a tension between hateful viewpoints and the democratic values that form the core structure of free speech as an inverted right that requires protecting those viewpoints. For instance, as I noted in the preceding discussion, the Klan has been devoted since its inception to opposing racial equality under law. Indeed, its founding ambition in the nineteenth century was to oppose precisely the kind of guarantees that the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides. The Equal Protection Clause is the clearest constitutional guarantee of the ideal of equal status, an ideal that also serves as a basis of the freedom of speech.15

The question of whether to protect the Klan's right peaceably to articulate its viewpoint therefore offers a clear illustration of a possible tension between the doctrine of viewpoint neutrality as a means of limiting state coercion and the values and reasons

10 In *Democratic Rights: The Substance of Self-Government* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), I defend the idea that respect for free and equal status requires a respect not only for democratic rights of participation, but also a respect for other substantive rights protections.

11 See John Stuart Mill, *On Liberty* in *The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XVIII—Essays on Politics and Society, Part I*, ed. John M. Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977), 252. As Mill writes: "Such being the partial character of prevailing opinions, even when resting on a true foundation, every opinion which embodies somewhat of the portion of truth which the common opinion omits, ought to be considered precious, with whatever amount of error and confusion that truth may be blended."

12 Steven Shiffrin, "Racist Speech, Outsider Jurisprudence, and the Meaning of America," *Cornell Law Review*, 80 (1994): 43–103.

13 Mill, *On Liberty,* 229: "If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth: if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error."

14 Nancy Rosenblum, especially in *Membership and Morals: The Personal Uses of Pluralism in America* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000).

15 See in particular the discussion of the founding of the Klan in *Virginia v. Black*.

underlying that doctrine. There is a clear conflict between the viewpoint of the Klan, which is a protected by a right to free speech, and the reasons to protect that viewpoint in the first place. In short, the Klan opposes the values of political equality and autonomy for all persons subject to the law, and these values are the very basis for the protection of its rights.

In sum, I want to concede that those like Lawrence, who offer an expressive justification for banning free speech, have identified a distinct structure of free speech jurisprudence that embraces viewpoint neutrality. Such a doctrine protects speech at odds with the reasons for free speech in the first place. Although, the protection of undemocratic viewpoints might be confused with endorsement of such viewpoints, I believe protection and endorsement are importantly distinct. Accordingly, I argue in the next section that "democratic persuasion," the state's active defense of its own values through its expressive capacities, has the potential to create a role for inverted free speech rights in a liberal democracy.

## **II. Democratic Persuasion as a Solution to the Problem of Inverted Rights**

On my view, it is important to retain a doctrine of viewpoint neutrality, but also to give expression to the reasons that underlie that doctrine. Thus, the state should protect the rights of hate groups, while also criticizing their discriminatory views. To see why there is an interest in both protecting and criticizing the Klan's viewpoint, for instance, it is important to consider three perspectives that reflect the different interests related to free speech: those of the speaker, the listener, and the democratic polity as a whole.

Dworkin describes the interest of citizens as *speakers* in being able to say whatever they wish. If citizens want to articulate a view that is at odds with the basis for the state's legitimacy, coercively preventing them from doing so would directly limit their autonomy. Denying speakers the ability to say what they want restricts one of the most basic capacities of citizens to decide and express their own political positions. Dworkin therefore emphasizes the importance of the citizen *qua* speaker in his defense of viewpoint neutrality. His view clearly articulates why the affirmative value of autonomy requires respect and protection of all viewpoints.

In addition to the interest of speakers, a second interest at stake in free speech rights is that of *listeners*, as Meiklejohn points out in his account of viewpoint neutrality. To fully exercise their right to autonomously form their own opinions, citizens in a democracy must be free to hear and consider any viewpoint they wish, free from government intrusion. Indeed, this interest of the listener might be held by citizens who are critical of hateful viewpoints. For instance, if I want to argue against a hateful viewpoint, I should be free to seek it out, understand it, and then criticize it.

Finally, a third perspective, according to Charles Beitz and T.M. Scanlon, is that of the citizenry as an *audience* in a democratic polity.16 The interest of citizens as an audience is distinct from their interest as listeners. The perspective of citizens as listeners is

<sup>16</sup> Charles Beitz, *Political Equality* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989) and T.M. Scanlon, "Freedom of Expression and Categories of Expression," *University of Pittsburgh Law Review*, 40 (1979): 519–50.

an individual one, whereas the perspective of citizens as an audience regards them as a collective and emphasizes the importance of the whole democratic polity. Citizens as a democratic audience have interests at stake in deciding what beliefs should prevail in their democracy. In particular, they have an interest in seeing that democratic values thrive in the polity as a whole, so that the right to vote and other procedural and substantive democratic rights are preserved for all citizens.

However, if these institutions are to be preserved, the democratic values that support them must also be defended. Some viewpoints, such as the Klan's, oppose the values of free and equal citizenship and are hostile to the values that underlie democratic institutions. On my view, the appropriate state response to this conflict is to protect the free speech rights of citizens to make all arguments as speakers and to hear all arguments as listeners. At the same time, the state should criticize antidemocratic and discriminatory viewpoints to uphold the interests of citizens as an audience in preserving democracy.

It might be objected that my view is unfair to discriminatory viewpoints because it does not allow them the equal chance to spread. However, this objection rests on a mistaken conception of fairness. Respect is owed not to specific viewpoints per se, but to individual citizens. Viewpoint neutrality requires that the state not coercively limit the free speech rights of citizens, but it does not oblige the state to be neutral when it comes to the expression and defense of the values central to its own legitimacy. Viewpoint neutrality does not mean value neutrality. On my account, the state should protect the right to freely express all viewpoints, but it should not be neutral in its own expression or endorsement of values. The state and its citizens should promote the democratic values of free and equal citizenship, while at the same time criticizing hateful or discriminatory values.

It would be implausible to interpret neutrality as guaranteeing equal success for all viewpoints. This misguided interpretation of neutrality would commit the state to bolstering viewpoints that seek to deny the rights of some citizens. Consider, for instance, whether the state should seek to revive Nazi ideology. If neutrality were interpreted as a state obligation to guarantee the equal success of all viewpoints, it would require the state affirmatively to promote Nazi ideology and other racist beliefs that are contrary to its most basic democratic values. The state's promotion of racism would contradict citizens' interest as an audience in preserving the institutions and entitlements of democracy and in ensuring that the democratic values of freedom and equality are widely shared and endorsed. Thus, the proper interpretation of viewpoint neutrality and the state's obligation to protect the right of free expression does not imply that everyone has an entitlement for the state to ensure that their own views prevail. On the contrary, the state has no obligation to ensure the equal success of hateful viewpoints, but instead has an interest on behalf of the democratic citizenry as an audience in seeing that the viewpoints consistent with the values of free and equal citizenship succeed while those inimical to these values fail. Furthermore, some viewpoints should not be promoted by the state and should be criticized by it.

I have outlined the tension between two sets of interests: the interest of speakers and listeners in viewpoint neutral protections and the interest of the citizenry as a whole in ensuring that democratic values have a prominent place in public discourse and that hateful viewpoints are combated. One way to resolve this tension is to simply go the way of militant democrats and ban the hateful speech. Indeed, Jeremy Waldron has argued in his recent work that there would be no loss in legitimacy from banning racist ideological viewpoints, such as those of the Klan.17 Waldron asks whether societies that do ban the expression of hateful viewpoints have less legitimate law, and he argues that they do not. Waldron's position would suggest, for instance, that in countries where hateful viewpoints are banned, the power to tax or to enforce the law is no less legitimate.

I agree with Waldron that some viewpoints risk undermining and challenging the equal status of all citizens. As I have emphasized, no viewpoint is entitled to success. I also agree with Waldron that it would go too far to claim that a society that lacks a doctrine of viewpoint neutrality would lack legitimacy in all its laws. But in my view, there would be an increase in the *degree* of democratic legitimacy in a society if it could counter hateful viewpoints while still maintaining viewpoint neutrality when it comes to protecting speakers from being punished for expressing their views.

To determine whether protecting free speech for hateful viewpoints would enhance legitimacy, we would do well to consider whether there is a difference between a society that has free speech and few hateful viewpoints and a society that limits free speech and has an equal number of hateful viewpoints, all else being equal.18 If it is possible to counter hateful viewpoints while protecting free speech, there would be an overall gain in the degree of democratic legitimacy. Specifically, the gain would come from preserving the entitlement of individuals to make and hear any opinion they wish. Such guarantees would enhance legitimacy by respecting the autonomy of citizens as speakers and listeners. It would also avoid the limits on autonomy that would come from coercively punishing some speakers. A society that offers this kind of viewpoint neutral protection of free speech would also realize political equality to a greater degree because it would extend free speech protections to all citizens. Given the greater legitimacy lent by free speech, the task is to devise a way for the state to protect the entitlements of citizens as speakers and listeners to say and listen to whatever they desire, while at the same time enabling it to combat hateful viewpoints that seek to undermine the values of free and equal citizenship. In short, the aim is to ensure that the interests of the speakers, listeners, and audience of the democratic citizenry as a whole are all respected and realized.

In my account of value democracy, we can both protect the rights of autonomous citizens and counter the discriminatory messages of hate groups. We can accomplish this by distinguishing between the state's expressive capacities and its coercive capacities. When acting in its coercive capacities, the state has an obligation to respect

<sup>17</sup> Jeremy Waldron, "Dignity and Defamation: The Visibility of Hate," *Harvard Law Review*, 123 (May 2010): 1596–657 and Jeremy Waldron, "Free Speech and the Menace of Hysteria," *New York Review of Books*, 55 (29 May 2008). <[http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2008/may/29/free](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2008/may/29/free-speech-the-menace-of-hysteria/)[speech-the-menace-of-hysteria/](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2008/may/29/free-speech-the-menace-of-hysteria/)>. Waldron's article is a review of Anthony Lewis, *Freedom for the Thought that We Hate* (New York: Basic Books, 2007). See too Jeremy Waldron, *The Harm in Hate Speech* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012).

<sup>18</sup> See Frank Michelman, "Legitimacy and Autonomy: Values of the Speaking State" for a discussion of my account of legitimacy in *Brooklyn Law Review* 79 (2014): 985–1004.

viewpoint neutrality by not coercing any speakers or listeners on the basis of their viewpoint. When the state acts in its expressive capacities, on the other hand, it must clarify why some protected viewpoints are at odds with the reasons for free expression in the first place. In this role, the state should both protect and criticize deeply inegalitarian viewpoints. These dual duties follow from the recognition that it is important not only for legitimate law to be justified, but also for the reasons behind the law be promulgated.

It is often thought that the state should promulgate the content of the law. Indeed laws passed in secret and never publicized are rightly thought to be a paradigm of illegitimacy,19 and the content of laws must be publicized so that citizens can predict when their actions might be sanctioned. But citizens should not only know their rights and the rules that are set out by law, but also the *reasons* for these rights and rules. The key issue is how the state might find a way to express the reasons underlying rights, given that the state must also protect citizens' expression of hateful viewpoints that oppose those reasons. One place to look for expression of the reasons for rights is within the decisions of the Court. The Court is ideally an "exemplar" of public reason in the sense that it protects democratic values by striking down unconstitutional laws, like those constraining free expression.20 In my view, however, the Court acts as an exemplar of public reason in a second sense as well by promulgating the reasons for rights. Namely, it acts as a model for the wider citizenry, including public officials who deliberate about and make the law, when it explains why certain laws are legitimate or illegitimate, and when it speaks in defense of the values of free and equal citizenship. The Court's audience extends to all citizens who are concerned to think and deliberate publicly about law making. This second notion of the Court as an exemplar of public reason is an instance of the state relying on its expressive capacity to promulgate the reasons for rights. Ideally, the Court should clarify to the citizenry that the state's protection of hateful viewpoints does not imply its approval of these viewpoints, as it has in fact done on some occasions.21 In other words, the Court should affirm the importance of rights such as free speech, while giving reasons to criticize discriminatory views.

Although the doctrine of viewpoint neutrality does call for a certain kind of humility when it comes to coercive action, the Court should not avoid articulating the values that underlie the doctrine. For instance, in *Virginia v. Black*, Justice O'Connor gives evidence that could be used to criticize the Klan's racist views, although she emphasizes the importance of protecting the group when it is expressing a viewpoint.22 In particular, O'Connor underscores that the Klan was founded to oppose basic legal

<sup>19</sup> Lon L. Fuller, *The Morality of Law* (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1964), 39.

<sup>20</sup> Rawls terms the Supreme Court an "exemplar" of public reason. It is clear he means to do so in my first sense, but it is unclear whether he would agree with my extension of this term to the second sense, that the Court should be an example for the wider citizenry. See Rawls, *Political Liberalism*, 231.

<sup>21</sup> *Snyder v. Phelps*, 131 S. Ct. 1207, 1220 (2011). In this case, while protecting the Westboro Baptist Church's right to demonstrate on public sidewalks, the Court repeatedly referred to the Westboro Baptist Church's activities as "hurtful."

<sup>22</sup> *Virginia v. Black*. Eg, while defending the Klan's expressive rights, Justice O'Connor argues that "the history of cross-burning in this country shows that cross burning is often intimidating, intended to create a pervasive fear in victims that they are a target of violence."

protections of equality under law.23 This history highlights why the Klan should be viewed as clearly opposing the ideals of free and equal citizenship. On my account, the Klan and other organizations with a discriminatory message should have the right, under the doctrine of viewpoint neutrality, to speak and hold their views, but they do not have the right to be free from criticism by the state in its expressive capacity. Although the state should be restrained in its coercive capacity so that it respects citizens' autonomy to make their own decisions, the state should be free to explain why it protects rights of free speech. Indeed, a robust role for the state in defending the values that underlie free speech is another way of honoring these values.

I take the idea of promulgating the reasons for rights to be the first step in what I call "democratic persuasion," which is a central feature of value democracy. Although the state should act in a viewpoint neutral manner when exercising its coercive capacity, it has a corresponding obligation to explain why it respects viewpoint neutrality in the first place. The state should use democratic persuasion, promulgating or publicly offering the reasons for rights, in an attempt to convince citizens that its reasons are good reasons. Democratic persuasion encourages citizens to engage in reflective revision, with the aim of respecting and incorporating the public values of equal citizenship in their own lives, families, and civic associations. But the state must be careful to make reasoning central and to avoid force when pursuing democratic persuasion.

Part of the Court's audience in the *Black* case is legislatures considering passing coercive laws that would ban hateful viewpoints short of direct threats. These state actors should be reminded of why such laws violate the ideals of free and equal citizenship. But a second audience for Court opinions is the Klan itself and other hate groups in the marketplace of ideas. To these citizens, the Court is saying that, while their right to free expression is protected, the content of their hateful views conflicts with the reasons for those rights protections. In addressing these citizens, the Court acts as an exemplar of public reason in the first and second senses described previously—it is both protecting a right and promulgating the reasons for that right.

Value democracy argues that the reasons for rights are not just intended to be expressed publicly; they are also meant to be persuasive. The arguments offered as part of democratic persuasion are intended to challenge and change the minds of those who do not appreciate the importance of free and equal citizenship in a legitimate society. Of course, hate groups including the Klan might not listen to reason or be persuaded, but in those cases, it is important to convince third parties and the population at large of the values of free and equal citizenship. Part of the task here is clarifying that the state is not neutral in regard to groups like the Klan, and that the state instead affirms the freedom and equality of all citizens. In short, the legitimate state should employ democratic persuasion to convince the citizenry as a whole that its reasons for protecting the rights of all citizens are good reasons.

As I have suggested, one example of democratic persuasion is Supreme Court opinions. However, these Court opinions on their own may not be effective in changing the minds of hate groups that oppose the ideal of equal citizenship. The early

<sup>23</sup> See *Virginia v. Black*, at 352. O'Connor writes, "The Klan fought Reconstruction and the corresponding drive to allow freed blacks to participate in the political process."

Klan membership of Justice Hugo Black aside, I assume that most members of hate groups are not thinking analytically about the nuances of First Amendment doctrine. Although they still have an important expressive purpose, we must acknowledge that Court opinions alone will not effectively persuade the citizenry at large of the reasons for rights. No single institution of government has an exclusive monopoly on the reasons that underlie rights. Other state actors in addition to the Court should also appeal to these reasons. These institutions should be concerned with the question of how to express the *reasons* for coercion and its limits.

When the state attempts to promulgate the reasons for rights without violating freedom of expression, it is essential that it observe two limits: means-based and substance-based. The first, *means-based limit* of democratic persuasion requires that the state must not pursue the transformation of citizens' views through any method that violates fundamental rights like freedom of expression, conscience, and association. For example, the state cannot use criminal sanctions to prohibit Klan meetings on the grounds that Klan members reject the reasons for freedom of expression. However, it would be appropriate for the state and its public officials to articulate why the Klan's views are inconsistent with the reasons for freedom of expression. In my view, the state can avoid crossing the means-based limit by confining its method of communicating its message to its expressive rather than its coercive capacity. For example, public officials and citizens engaged in public discussion may make arguments that seek to transform hateful viewpoints. In addition, I will suggest in the next section that there is a wide role for educators and the state more broadly to teach the importance of the ideal of equal citizenship. The challenge for value democracy, however, lies in simultaneously protecting rights to expression against coercive interference, while criticizing inegalitarian beliefs protected by these rights.

As I suggested earlier, the criticism involved depends on the degree to which the beliefs oppose free and equal citizenship. Hate groups like the Klan should be condemned by the state, as their very mission is to undermine democratic values like the equal protection of all citizens under law. However, in many instances, it is the specific discriminatory beliefs of citizens that the state should criticize, and in these cases, the state should make it clear that it is not condemning their entire belief set.

Since the notion of coercion is central to the means-based limit, it is worth elaborating on how I will use this term. Drawing on Robert Nozick's work on this subject, I define coercion as the state threat to impose a sanction or punishment on an individual or group of individuals with the aim of prohibiting a particular action, expression, or belief.24 Coercion, by this definition, need not be carried out; indeed some people might resist the state's threats. But the mere fact that a state action is coercive does not imply, as some have inferred, that the action is unjustifiable.25 On the contrary, there

<sup>24</sup> Robert Nozick, "Coercion," in Nozick, *Socratic Puzzles* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997), 15–44.

<sup>25</sup> I do not, therefore, rely on a moralized conception of coercion. In a moralized conception, an act counts as coercion only if it is not fully justified. For the moralized conception, see Alan Wertheimer, *Coercion* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990). However, my definition differs from the moralized conception in that it acknowledges that certain acts can be morally justified and yet coercive. Eg, imprisoning murderers is coercive in my definition, but morally justified. My definition uses the

are certainly justifiable cases of state coercion. For example, it is justifiable for the state to employ coercive criminal law in an attempt to stop citizens from committing acts of violence like murder, rape, and assault. The means-based limit, however, suggests that the state should not use coercion to prohibit expression. Coercive threats would deny the ability of persons to decide for themselves what kinds of policy beliefs to express. This denial would fail to respect the entitlement of citizens to develop and exercise their moral powers. In particular, coercively banning viewpoints would impair the ability of citizens to determine autonomously which beliefs they wish to hold and defend.

It should be emphasized, however, that a state's attempt to change people's minds by expressing certain beliefs does not constitute coercion, since the state does not seek to prohibit citizens from holding conflicting beliefs. To the contrary, it is central to the idea of expression and, more specifically, to the expression and defense of the core values of freedom and equality that citizens remain free to reject it. Although I argue that the state should seek to persuade citizens to endorse democratic values, it is essential to the values of freedom and equality that the state not attempt to force acceptance. On the contrary, citizens should be free to reject the state's defenses of the core values of free and equal citizenship. For similar reasons, the state should avoid manipulating citizens into accepting the values of free and equal citizenship by intentionally misleading them or by subliminally trying to change their minds. To respect autonomy, the means-based limit suggests that democratic persuasion must be transparent. But the requirement that democratic persuasion include explicit reasons does not mean that it must avoid emotion or rhetorical persuasiveness. Indeed as Sharon Krause has pointed out, there is nothing about the appeal to emotion that need be inconsistent with reasoning.26

In addition to being subject to a means-based limit, democratic persuasion is also subject to a second, *substance-based limit.* This substance-based limit restricts the kinds of beliefs that the state is obligated to seek to transform through its expressive capacity as well as the circumstances under which the state is justified in exercising that capacity. It is necessary for the state to use its expressive capacity to challenge only those beliefs that violate the ideals of free and equal citizenship. In particular, the state should not seek to transform all inegalitarian beliefs, but only those that challenge the ideals of free and equal citizenship.

It is essential to clarify here that equal citizenship constitutes a political ideal; it is not the equivalent to equality in every sense. For instance, if I always neglect to pay the check at dinner with my friend, I might violate the ideal of an equal friendship, but in doing so I do not violate the ideal of equal citizenship. In sum, the substance-based limit of democratic persuasion requires the state to criticize only views incompatible with the ideals of free and equal citizenship and not views that are incompatible with morality per se.

non-moral but normative criterion that acts count as coercion when they attempt to deny a choice. For discussion on this point, I thank Eric Beerbohm and Daniel Viehoff.

<sup>26</sup> See Sharon R. Krause, *Civil Passions: Moral Sentiment and Democratic Deliberation* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008).

Of course, there will be easy and hard cases—it is not always obvious whether a belief is incompatible with the ideal of equal citizenship and therefore subject to criticism by the state. It is only views that are openly hostile to the ideal of equal citizenship or implausibly compatible with it that the state has an obligation to criticize, according to the substance-based limit. For example, the views of hate groups are paradigmatic of views that are openly hostile to democratic values or implausibly disguised in a language of equality.27 However, groups or citizens who hold opinions that might be plausible interpretations of equal citizenship, although there may be controversy over them, should not be subject to disapproval by the state in its expressive capacities. For instance, while some may think an ideal of equality requires affirmative action, other citizens who disapprove of this policy are not expressing opinions that are necessarily hostile to or implausibly connected to the ideal of equal citizenship. They may oppose affirmative action on grounds that may be plausibly interpreted as consistent with equal citizenship, like an ideal of colorblindness in the college admissions process. The disagreement would be reasonable in that case and not subject to democratic persuasion. The substance-based limit therefore makes the state use of democratic persuasion more limited than the principle of public relevance. The principle of public relevance identifies conflicts generally between free and equal citizenship and individual beliefs and suggests the importance of making these beliefs consistent with democratic values. The substance-based limit, on the other hand, further narrows the instances when the state should engage in democratic persuasion. According to the substance-based limit, the state should use democratic persuasion only when individuals hold or advance ideas that clearly conflict or are implausibly claimed to be consistent with the ideals of free and equal citizenship.

The substance-based limit of democratic persuasion concerns the content of what the state is obligated to say on behalf of its own values. At times, the state articulates these values and their justifying reasons through state actors, and in these cases the substance-based limit should then be followed. But this limit certainly does not entail that state actors cannot articulate opinions on controversial matters when speaking in their own capacities. Particular citizens, politicians, or state actors may have their own opinions on questions about which there is reasonable disagreement, including questions about conflicting interpretations of equal citizenship. Moreover, although my focus is on instances in which the state is obligated to promote the ideals of free and equal citizenship and to criticize viewpoints at odds with it, I hold open the possibility that other kinds of state speech might be neither obligatory nor prohibited. Pronouncements in favor of public health, like warnings about smoking or trans-fat, do not violate an ideal of equal citizenship, but neither are they required to clarify the meaning of equal citizenship. Such pronouncements might be permissible on grounds that are distinct from the ones I explore.

<sup>27</sup> I am thinking, for instance, of the case of former Klan Grand Wizard David Duke. His National Association for the Advancement of White People masks clearly inegalitarian views in the language of equality. The Association makes the misleading claim on its website that it "campaigns merely for the equal treatment of all races." See<http://www.davidduke.com/general/what-is-racism_32.html>.

In sum, democratic persuasion is an attempt by the legitimate state to express the reasons and values that underlie rights. In some instances, democratic persuasion requires challenging viewpoints that are protected by rights, especially when the viewpoints are hateful. But the point of democratic persuasion is not merely to express the values of equal citizenship as a philosophical exercise. It is ideally an attempt to change the minds both of the members of hate groups and of citizens more generally, and to keep the hate group's influence from spreading. Given the choice between expressing the values of freedom and equality in a non-persuasive or a persuasive manner, all else being equal, the state should opt for forms of persuasion that are more convincing. If the reasons and values that underlie rights are central to the legitimacy of the state, it follows that the state has a role in defending them, especially when they are under attack. Part of defending democratic values is making persuasive arguments on their behalf.28

I have argued so far that an account of free expression should both defend the free-speech rights of individuals against state coercion, and allow the state to promote the values that underlie these rights. I have also maintained that the state must respect both the *substance-based* and *means-based* limits of democratic persuasion when it promotes the ideal of free and equal citizenship through its expressive capacity. I now turn to explore how the state might fulfill these duties. The contemporary state can "speak" in favor of its own values—and against those who deny the freedom and equality of citizens—in a variety of ways, ranging from the direct statements of politicians to the establishment of monuments and public holidays. Martin Luther King Day and Black History Month exemplify official endorsement of the Civil Rights Movement's struggle for equality. Public officials do not shy away from political viewpoints when they celebrate and commemorate these official holidays. Rather, they articulate the ideal of equal status and celebrate those citizens who have promoted it. Far from being viewpoint neutral about Southern segregation or groups like the Klan, the state promotes a particular viewpoint in defense of equal protection. Of course, citizens have the right to dissent from such expression. But here the state and its citizens should stand together to express disapproval of those who defend segregation in our society or who, more subtly, lament the end of "states' rights" that would protect segregation.

Another way to frame state expression in defense of these values is through the state's action as an educator. When state standards require that the history of civil rights and the struggle against groups like the Klan be taught in schools, for instance, these matters are not taught in a viewpoint neutral way. The movement and its victories

<sup>28</sup> Democratic persuasion allows for certain forms of rhetoric to further the democratic values that underlie rights, provided that the rhetoric is truthful and combined with the promulgation of reasons. My aim, however, is not to provide a roadmap detailing how such rhetoric might be employed, but to justify and describe the state's role as it engages in democratic persuasion. A model for the rhetoric of democratic persuasion might be found in what Simone Chambers and others have called a "deliberative rhetoric," in which effective communication is tied together with public reasoning, as opposed to a "plebiscitary rhetoric," which tries to change people's minds without explaining the underlying reasons or principles. An account of deliberative rhetoric can help to show that democratic persuasion can effectively promote the ideals of free and equal citizenship. See Simone Chambers, "Rhetoric and the Public Sphere: Has Deliberative Democracy Abandoned Mass Democracy?" *Political Theory*, 37(3) (2009), 323–50.

are rightly taught as part of the American effort to live up to our proclaimed values of equality. The hope of public educators in teaching the lessons of Martin Luther King Day and Black History Month is that, regardless of what they are taught at home, students will learn the value of equal status for all citizens.

## **III. An Urgent Example of Inverted Rights: The International Furor Over an Anti-Islam Video**

"Innocence of Muslims" is a video made by a Coptic Christian resident of California. When a preview for the video was uploaded to YouTube, much of the Muslim world reacted with protests and in some cases riots. The video depicted the Prophet Mohammed and the Muslim people as child molesters. In a homophobic vein, too, the video indicated that widespread homosexuality was also inherent to Islam.

Reactions to the protection of the video under American free speech law have been divided on two familiar lines that separate the United States from most other nations in the world. "Prohibitionists" called for free speech to be limited in the face of blasphemous or hateful expression, while "neutralists," the most vocal defenders of free speech, have argued that the government should express no opinion about hate speech. For example, the conservative press reacted to President Obama's condemnation of the video by calling it an apology for our rights of free expression.

Lost in these two familiar reactions, however, is the third way of envisioning free speech that I have outlined and that lacks the flaws of prohibitionist bans and neutralist refusals to condemn even the worst hate speech. Value democracy would protect all viewpoints, even racist and anti-religious ones, from coercion. But in my view, the protection of free speech must be combined with a strong defense of the value of equal respect. The state should use its status as an influential speaker to defend democratic values and to argue against hateful viewpoints. It is essential that the state criticize hate speech to avoid the misperception that protection means indifference or endorsement. This kind of misperception is endemic in the inverted structure of free speech rights based on viewpoint neutrality, which protect all viewpoints.

The State Department and the President appropriately used this third approach in their public statements and advertisements run on Pakistani television. Far from being a flawed "apology," as conservative media charged, the advertisements released by the State Department suggested how we might appeal to democratic values to condemn hate speech. This approach allows American foreign policy to articulate and explain our uniquely robust free speech tradition. The policy avoids the blunt instrument of prohibiting hate speech as well as the anemic refusal to condemn it.

A viewpoint neutral right to free speech protects the freedom to express "blasphemous" viewpoints that may be seen as defaming or disparaging fundamental religious tenets. Included in this right is the freedom to assert the truth of one religion's beliefs and to disparage assertions of another religion. The anti-Muslim video is also protected by this standard. The video is meant to cause offense in its depictions of the Prophet Mohammed as a child molester. It combines homophobia and anti-Muslim animus in asserting that homosexuality is fundamental to Islam. In the United States, however, attempts to ban this work would be restricted on free speech grounds.

But the fact that the video is protected on free speech grounds has been confused throughout the world with the endorsement of the content of the video or at least the refusal to condemn it. This misperception that the state's protection of an anti-Islamic video means that it endorses the video has sparked riots throughout the world. One widely circulated clip that is typical of these denunciations uses the video to suggest that democracy is inherently disrespectful to Islam, because it allows hateful anti-Islamic speech to be expressed without punishment. An impassioned critic goes so far as to suggest that disrespect of Islam is "what democracy is all about."

The confusion of protection and approval is deeply linked to the structure of our rule of viewpoint neutrality. If the government wants to condemn a message, it often does so through a ban. For instance, the government sends the message that murder is wrong by punishing murderers. Conversely, the protection of an act is often thought to signal indifference to it. For instance, the state does not ban interracial marriage, and the lack of a ban is often interpreted as a lack of state disapproval. So it is not surprising that protection of the video might be wrongly thought to signal that the state condones or even approves of it. This example therefore serves to clearly illustrate why free speech has an "inverted structure," in that the right of free expression can protect viewpoints that are hostile to the very reasons for protecting rights. We protect Nazi speech, even though Nazism would deny free speech protection to others and even though it stands in deep opposition to the democratic value of equal respect that underlies our free speech protection. Although the conflation between protection and approval is understandable given the inverted structure of free speech, it is a mistake to think that free speech entails government indifference to hate speech.

The need to clarify that robust free speech commitments are compatible with the condemnation of hateful viewpoints is evident domestically, but it is also important abroad. When the state "speaks" in its public diplomacy, it is essential that it explains the values that underlie free speech. Confusion about the meaning of the United States' commitment to free speech has drastic consequences. Rioters in Pakistan appeared to believe that the American government was neutral toward or even approving of the hateful views expressed in the video. The nation and its representatives need to explain to the world that the United States does not protect free speech out of indifference to the content of those who abuse it. We can clarify that the United States protects all viewpoints, but that it condemns those viewpoints that violate the democratic value of equal respect.

It is essential to clarify what kinds of viewpoints are rightly subject to criticism if the United States is successfully to deliver to the international community the subtle message that it protects the right to express hateful viewpoints but criticizes their content. What precisely merits government criticism in the video? One option is to criticize the video as blasphemous. But blasphemy is the wrong frame of criticism, as it would violate the substance-based limit on democratic persuasion. The state in a liberal democracy should not take a position on which religions are false and which are true. Since blasphemy takes a side in disputes between religions, it is not a perspective to endorse. Citizens must not only be free from coercion but also free from state criticism if they assert the truth of one religion and the falsity of others.

The content of "Innocence of Muslims" is not merely about asserting the "falsity" of Islam and the truth of another religion. Instead, it is filled with hostility toward the Muslim people as child molesters. It is analogous to the famous blood libel, myths about Jewish ritual used to slander Jews. The blood libel is anti-Semitic hate speech masked as criticism of religious practice. Similarly, "Innocence of Muslims" claims to criticize religious practice, but it actually aims to disparage the Muslim people. The video should thus be regarded as a form of hate speech against Muslims.

The United States government should articulate why our tradition of free speech and religious freedom is founded upon an ideal of equal respect. That ideal is violated by the anti-Muslim video. The government has a duty to articulate why the right to free speech is protected in the case of the video, even though it condemns the video's message. This can clarify for an international audience that the state's protection of hateful expression does not imply approval of the content of that expression. The State Department adopted this response when it aired ads in Pakistan to quell riots there. The videos show President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton giving an official defense of our free speech traditions while condemning the video. They took neither a neutralist nor a prohibitionist approach to hate speech, but a third approach: democratic persuasion. They defended free speech protection for the videos, yet made use of state speech to clarify that protection does not imply approval or indifference. Instead, they articulated that protection of the right of free speech was based on the value of equal respect. They clarified that the same values that lead us to protect hate speech can also lead us to condemn it.

With the lens of this third view of democratic persuasion, we can see the State Department ads as a principled defense of democratic values, not an apology or a pragmatic concession to the need to quell the riots. Of course the violence abroad provided an impetus for these advertisements. But rightly understood, the aim to protect and criticize hate speech should be a broader part of United States public diplomacy beyond the specific commercials run in Pakistan. Such a policy of democratic persuasion would articulate why we defend free speech, while at the same time condemning hateful expression.

### **IV. Conclusion**

Critics of viewpoint neutral speech protections have argued that state protection of hate speech would render states incapable of expressing disapproval of hate speech. This argument has led these critics to recommend banning hate speech. But I have argued that these critics help to elucidate a distinct structure of viewpoint neutral protections: They are inverted in that they protect speech at odds with the foundational values that ground free speech in the first place.

The inverted structure of free speech therefore carries with it a duty to explain that some protected speech may be at odds with the state's own viewpoint. To make this clarification, the state should engage in democratic persuasion, condemning anti-democratic protected speech.

Nowhere is the confusion regarding the inverted structure of free speech more clear than in the case of the international reaction to "Innocence of Muslims." I have defended the State Department's condemnation of the video as a kind of democratic persuasion, necessary to explain the inverted structure of free speech rights.