---
title: "Rescuing Proportionality"
author:
  - name: "George Letsas"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "316–340"
citation_key: "letsas2015proportionality"
---

## [Rescuing Proportionality](#page-8-2)

*George Letsas**

### **I. Introduction**

<span id="page-330-0"></span>What human rights people have is a contested and complex philosophical issue. It involves many different questions about the nature of rights, about when some right is a *human* right, as well as institutional questions about when particular human rights courts should enforce individual claims. Not all rights are enforceable and not all rights are human rights. Gratuitous promises create moral rights and duties between the promisor and the promisee but these are neither human nor enforceable. Not all rights enforceable in law moreover are human rights. In English law, the seller of a property has the right to use the buyer's deposit, between exchange of contracts and completion, in order to purchase another property. The seller's right is an enforceable legal right in English law but we would hardly call it a human right. On the other hand, many rights are proclaimed as human without necessarily being enforceable. Socio-economic rights to health, education, or shelter are nowadays considered to be human rights, but their enforceability is the exception, not the norm.

In Europe and other parts of the world, courts use the doctrine of proportionality as a test in order to determine whether someone's human rights have been violated. Proportionality is hailed as a universal criterion of constitutionality.1 According to the orthodox understanding of this legal doctrine, state interference with non-absolute human rights (such as privacy, freedom of religion or expression) is lawful, if it is proportionate to a legitimate aim in pursuit of which the state acted. In its standard form the test consists of two main stages. First, courts will ask whether there has been an interference with a liberty or interest that falls within the scope of a right protected in the relevant convention or constitution (the *scope or definitional* stage). Second, the court will ask whether that interference was justified or 'necessary in a democratic society' (the *justification or limitation* stage). The limitation will be deemed justified, if it was prescribed by law and was proportionate to a legitimate aim in pursuit of which the government acted. On their face, the labels suggest that the first stage of the

1 David M Beatty, *The Ultimate Rule of Law* (Oxford University Press, 2004), 162.

*<sup>*</sup>* I have benefited enormously from discussions with Dimitrios Kyritsis, Stuart Lakin, Virginia Mantouvalou Prince Saprai, Nicos Stavropoulos, Robert Stevens and from their comments on earlier drafts. A version of this paper was presented at the UCL Colloquium in Legal & Social Philosophy in February 2013. I am grateful to the audience for their questions and to my two commentators, John Tasioulas and Jeff King, for their extremely valuable comments, corrections, and suggestions. I am much indebted to the editor, Massimo Renzo, who helped me enormously to clarify the main arguments of the paper and to address its main weaknesses.

orthodox test is about what rights we have and the second stage is about the conditions under which they can be limited.

The doctrine of proportionality adds another layer of complexity to philosophical questions about the nature of human rights. Does proportionality determine what *constitutes* a right? Does it determine what makes a right, a *human* right? Or does it determine what makes one's human right, all things considered, *enforceable*?

The difference between these questions is not terminological. It is of practical, as well as philosophical, significance. Consider the European Court of Human Rights case of *Hatton v. United Kingdom*.2 Ms Ruth Hatton lived next to Heathrow airport in London. She complained that the night flight scheme of Heathrow airport violated her human right to private life. The European Court held that the government's flight scheme had interfered with the applicant's private life, but that the interference was proportionate to advancing the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, which is a legitimate state aim under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). The Court decided that the applicant had no enforceable right under the ECHR to be free from that interference. Now, saying that the applicant in *Hatton* had a human right, which was justifiably violated, has practical consequences. Looking backwards, we should regret that the government had to violate the applicant's human rights and feel for the victim. Looking forward, we should seek to prevent it from happening again and from happening to others. If, on the other hand, we say that the applicant in *Hatton* had no right—or no *human* right—to be free from noise interference, then we let the British government off an important moral hook; this is because human rights are typically thought to be standards of high moral stringency. If the government did not violate Ms Hatton's rights then it has no human-rights-based reason not to interfere with people's private life in similar ways in the future, say by expanding the night flight scheme to other airports in the country. In either case, we are subjecting the result in *Hatton* to moral scrutiny and making assumptions about the moral value of human rights and the justifiability of governmental action.

What it is that proportionality is supposed to determine has also philosophical significance. If we count the applicant's claim in *Hatton* as constituting a genuine human right (albeit defeated in the circumstances) then we have to explain what property it has in common with other rights that we consider human, and in virtue of which they are *all* human rights. Suppose, for example, that we take the view that what makes torture a human right is the fact that it is an assault on one's agency. We now have to show the sense in which allowing night flights assaulted the agency of the applicant in *Hatton*. If we cannot show this, then we should revise either our philosophical theory of human rights or our view about *Hatton*. Likewise, if we dismiss the applicant's claim in *Hatton* as bogus, not constituting a real human right, then we have to explain what it is that the claim lacks and real human rights have. Suppose for example that we endorse a theory of human rights, according to which what makes something a human right is the fact that it protects important and universal interests of human beings. We now have to show why freedom from loud noise is not an important interest, or why it

2 *Hatton v. United Kingdom* (2003) 37 EHRR 611.

is not a universal one. If we cannot show this, then we should revise either our philosophical theory of human rights or our view about *Hatton*.

So thinking about proportionality is a complex equation that also includes moral rights, human rights, and legally enforceable rights. Philosophers have written a great deal about moral and legal rights but only recently turned their attention to human rights. Proportionality has attracted even less philosophical attention, though it has received extensive doctrinal treatment by European constitutional theorists and lawyers. It is, I suspect, too lawyerly a concept to attract philosophical interest, particularly if its role is to tell us what a human rights court should enforce in given circumstances. It is tempting to view it as a 'practicality',3 to do with various contingencies regarding the implementation of human rights norms. The approach of the courts does not help either, since their reasoning under the heading of proportionality is often scant and conclusory, as is typical in civil law jurisdictions.4

In this paper I engage in the familiar philosophical task of seeking to make sense of proportionality, as it figures in human rights doctrine. By 'sense' I mean nothing more (and nothing less) than *moral* sense. I am interested in the very possibility that the doctrine of proportionality picks out a moral principle that is capable of justifying human rights or limits to them. It is of course possible that human rights courts appeal to proportionality as a ground of justification whereas they ought not to. It is also possible that courts misapply or mischaracterize what is otherwise a valid moral principle. Finally, it is possible that some principle justifies the outcomes in cases where 'proportionality' figures in the reasoning of the courts, but that that principle bears no connection—semantic or otherwise—to the concept of proportionality. I want to leave all these possibilities open and address them only after we have a good sense of the moral dimension of proportionality, if it has any. So I should like to begin by moving away from the jargon of legal doctrine, so far as it is possible to do so, and explore first what proportionality means in non-legal contexts. If some moral concern underlies proportionality, it should have a life outside of legal doctrine.

#### **II. Four Senses of Proportionality**

We should begin by assigning some preliminary content to the concept of proportionality with a view to fix which of the many possible uses of the word is of relevance to human rights. The word figures in ordinary language in many different contexts and it is important to distinguish between them.

In mathematics and physics, we use the notion of proportionality to mean that there is a fixed ratio between two variable quantities, such that a change in one quantity always co-relates to a change in the other. In mathematics, what fixes the constant ratio between two quantities is the truth of some theorem or axiom. Consider for

<sup>3</sup> This is Griffin's term for how particular human rights play out in different institutional contexts. See James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (Oxford University Press, 2009), 37.

<sup>4</sup> On the differences between common law and civil law reasoning about rights see George Letsas, 'Judge Rozakis's Separate Opinions and the Strasbourg Dilemma', in Dean Spielmann et al., *The European Convention on Human Rights: A Living and Dynamic Instrument—Liber Amicorum in Honour of Judge Rozakis* (Bruylant, 2011).

example Thales's basic proportionality theorem. If you draw a line within a triangle parallel to one of its sides, then it will divide the other two sides in exactly the same ratio. Whatever is the ratio in which the drawn line will divide one side, it will be exactly the same for the other side. We can prove the truth of this theorem in a mathematical form, given what a triangle and a parallel line are. In physics on the other hand, what fixes the constant ratio between two variable quantities is the truth of some law of nature. For example, Newton's law of universal gravitation tells us that the force by which two objects attract each other is directly proportionate to their mass and indirectly proportionate to the distance between them. The bigger the objects, the more they attract each other. And the longer the distance between them, the less they attract each other. Newton's law is an empirical fact about the world. Knowing it helps us build bridges that hold up and fly planes that don't crash.

We can call this notion of proportionality *descriptive*, since it figures in statements that tell us that two things in the world co-relate. It can be contrasted with *normative* uses or proportionality, which tell us that two variables *ought* to co-relate. These uses are no less familiar. Many people around the world believe in the system of proportional representation, which advocates a particular co-relation between votes and seats in parliament. In its simple form, proportional representation requires that the share of seats each political party has in parliament be the same as its share of the popular electoral vote. Proportional representation is not meant to express a law of physics or a mathematical theorem. It is an action-guiding normative statement about how we *ought* to conduct our politics, design our electoral process, and allocate legislative power. It is a statement moreover whose truth depends, not on some empirical fact, but on a moral ideal, that of democracy. The normative dimension of the principle of proportional representation should not be obscured by how simple its application is. If correct, the principle requires us to assign seats in proportion to popular vote. Applying this in practice requires no more than basic mathematics. All we have to do to find out how many seats a party is entitled to have following an election, is to multiply the number of votes it got by the total number of available seats and then divide the product by the total number of voters. The application of proportionality here is easy because we are dealing with arithmetic percentages of quantifiable variables (votes and seats). But just because the application of proportionality here involves no moral reasoning, that is not to say that it has no moral basis. It is democracy, on the proposed hypothesis, that requires us to assign seats following the mathematical model of 1:1 ratio between the share of the votes and the share of seats.

Sometimes the concept of proportionality can be normative in a more direct way, requiring no resort to mathematical reasoning. Consider the familiar moral injunction that punishment must fit the crime. We shouldn't sentence someone to life imprisonment for a traffic violation and we shouldn't impose a small fine to someone who has committed murder. The severity of punishment one receives must be proportionate to the gravity of the crime she has committed. This statement, like that of proportional representation, is an action-guiding statement about how we ought to arrange our institutions. Its truth depends, not on some empirical fact, but on some moral fact about the nature of punishment and of crime. But unlike proportional representation, the principle that punishment must be proportionate to the crime has a direct moral appeal. Most of us would assert it intuitively without much thought and we would be very surprised to be told that morality allows us to sentence someone to life imprisonment for violating a speed limit.5 Moreover, we find punishment disproportionate not only when it fails to match the gravity of the wrongness but also when it fails to match the circumstances of the wrongdoer. For example, it would be disproportionate to sentence a minor to a life sentence, even if he has committed murder. The wrongdoer's age is a consideration that the state authorities ought to take into account. But it is also a consideration a parent should take into account in disciplining his child. Proportionality, in its normative sense, can track a variety of moral reasons and applies to a variety of moral practices. Its semantic content is subservient to the moral value that governs the domain in question (for example, democracy or desert in punishment). I shall take this to be the central sense of proportionality and the only one that is of interest to the discussion of moral rights, including human rights.

Apart from proportionality it its descriptive sense, proportionality as a normative notion must be distinguished from two further senses. The first is the one which figures in Lord Diplock's oft-quoted phrase: 'you must not use a steam hammer to crack a nut, if a nutcracker would do'.6 We can call this notion '*proportionality as instrumental rationality*'. The idea here is that the means one employs to achieve a certain end that he has, must be proportionate to that end. There are several layers to this instrumental notion of proportionality, each of which relates to the rationality of choosing means in order to advance one's ends. First, one is to employ means that are suitable for one's purpose, ie, that are capable of bringing about the intended outcome. You should not waste your time trying to crack a nut with a toothpick. You would be irrational if you were to do so. Second, given the choice of various alternatives, each of which suffices to bring about the intended outcome, one is to employ the least costly or onerous one. Why spend time and money to get a steam hammer to crack a nut, when you have a nutcracker right there? Assuming you have reason to save time and money, then you would be irrational using a steam hammer over a nutcracker. Third, the overall cost of taking the means to achieve the intended outcome should not be greater than the benefit that outcome will confer. You would be acting irrationally spending hours of your valuable time trying to crack a bunch of tough nuts, time which you could be using to make an income, when you can easily go out and get shelled nuts at a price much lower than the financial value of your work.

*Proportionality as instrumental rationality* is action-guiding, but hardly in a moral sense. Though it has an intuitive appeal, it lacks a moral dimension. There is nothing morally untoward in employing means for achieving one's goals that are ineffective or sub-optimal. I may be irrational trying to crack a nut with a toothpick or a steam hammer, but I do not violate anyone's moral rights. Likewise, I am acting irrationally paying a costly gym subscription every month, rather than pay per visit, given that

<sup>5</sup> This is not to say of course that the principle of proportionate punishment cannot and should not be given a moral justification. One way to justify it is under a retributive theory according to which the point of punishment is to give wrongdoers what they *deserve*. Since they deserve to suffer for the wrong they committed, the severity of their punishment must be proportionate to the gravity of their wrongdoing. Punishing someone more severely than he deserves is punishing him for a crime that he did not commit.

<sup>6</sup> *Regina v. Goldstein* (1983) WLR 151, HL.

I very rarely use it. This makes me foolish and spendthrift, not to mention poorer, but not a wrongdoer. The fact that an action is disproportionate, *qua* irrational, does not make it wrongful.

Of course, my spendthrift habits *can* interfere with someone's rights if someone has a moral right to a share of my income. For example, if a parent is struggling to pay for his children's school fees or his mortgage, then we may say that he is wrong to spend a disproportionate amount of money for a gym subscription that he rarely uses. But the notion of proportionality employed here has nothing to do with instrumental rationality, but rather with the presence of moral rights on the part of others and the demand for just distribution, just like in proportionate representation: the parent has a duty to distribute his disposable income in proportion to the needs of his family. His children have a right to a share of his income of which he may be depriving them, by paying a costly gym subscription. Notice here that the direction of the argument is *from* the fact that the parent has distributive responsibilities *to* what counts as him spending disproportionately. What is morally relevant is not the fact that having a gym subscription is not a rational means to promote his ends; it is that it prevents him from carrying out his distributive duties towards his family. Absent distributive duties to others, his profligacy would be morally innocuous.

So the fact that the means one takes to pursue one's goal are irrational is not, in itself, wrongful. The other side, or I should say downside, of *proportionality as instrumental rationality* is this: the fact that an action is rationally connected to one's aim doesn't make it rightful. This is because the moral character of an action depends on the aim that the agent seeks to achieve. If the aim is morally improper, then it matters little that one employs cost-effective means to bring it about. An extortionist who has read Lord Diplock's quote, and uses the most cost-effective means to break his victim's fingers, acts proportionately to his aim, but wrongly nevertheless. There is no such thing as proportionate extortion or proportionate torture.

Finally, we should distinguish cost-effectiveness, as a non-moralized standard of instrumental rationality, from a moral idea which is too familiar an idea in law and philosophy, namely that an action is morally right if it maximizes the total sum of expected *societal* benefits minus the costs; it is wrongful if it fails to do so. Utilitarianism, in its many variants, makes this particular kind of cost-effectiveness, ie, maximizing utility, the only standard of rightness and wrongness. I doubt however whether the idea of proportionality can be used to express an overtly utilitarian moral outlook. On this outlook, punishing an innocent person would be proportionate if it maximizes utility; having a dictator would be a proportionate distribution of legislative power if it maximizes utility,7 and so on and so forth. No doubt, the avowed utilitarian will try to offer an indirect utilitarian justification for non-utilitarian rules of ordinary morality. He will argue for example, as Bentham himself claimed,8 that proportionate punishing is morally justified because, in the long run, it is more likely to

<sup>7</sup> On the idea that representative democracy need not be an effective way to maximize utility see Jeremy Waldron, *Liberal Rights* (Cambridge University Press, 1993), ch. 16.

<sup>8</sup> Jeremy Bentham, *An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation*, edited by J. H. Burns and H. L. A. Hart (Oxford University Press, 1996), ch. 14 ('Of the Proportion between Punishment and Offences').

maximize utility. Appealing to ways in which rules or decision procedures can indirectly maximize utility is a familiar manoeuvre in the history of utilitarian thought that need not, however, distract us here. It suffices to say that direct utilitarianism has difficulty accounting for standard uses of the principle of proportionality, as found in ordinary moral discourse. Punishing someone who commits a traffic offence—let alone an innocent person—with life imprisonment is wrong, regardless of the contribution that doing so makes to social utility. Indirect forms of utilitarianism could try to account for these judgments of proportionality, but then again such forms of utilitarianism can try, by reverse engineering, to account for *anything* we take to be a moral right. Whatever form such attempts take, they will always get the order of explanation wrong: one has a right not to be subjected to punishment disproportionate to his crime, regardless of whether it maximizes utility to punish him more severely than he deserves.

### **III. The Vacuous Orthodoxy and its Critics**

In the previous section I identified four ways in which the concept of proportionality is used: first, in descriptive judgments about the way the physical world is (for example, Newton's law); second in moral judgments about what rights people have according to some value (for example, democracy or retribution); third, as a norm of instrumental, 'means-ends', rationality; and fourth as a utilitarian principle of maximizing utility. Now, which of these four senses figures in the legal practice of human rights?

The orthodox understanding of proportionality amongst constitutional scholars and judges includes elements from both the third and the fourth sense above, and at first glance appears morally objectionable. As mentioned earlier, proportionality is described as a judicial test whose aim is to determine the conditions under which governmental measures may justifiably infringe constitutional or human rights (the 'limitation stage'). Courts tend to devote little time to the first stage of rights-based review which is about what falls within the protect scope of a human right ('the scope stage'), moving quickly to the limitation stage. In German constitutional theory, the test of proportionality is said to have three prongs:

- (i)╇ Is the impugned measure rationally connected to the pursuit of a legitimate aim (the '*suitability*' test)?
- (ii) Is the measure necessary for the pursuit of that aim (the '*necessity*' test)?
- (iii)╇ Is the seriousness of the interference with the applicant's right proportionate to the benefits gained in pursuit of the legitimate aim in question ('proportionality in the *narrow sense*', or '*balancing*')?

The first two prongs echo norms of instrumental rationality, as they figure in Lord Diplock's nutcracker quote, discussed earlier. Without the third prong, they reflect ordinary judicial tests that are used outside the context of human rights review, such as the English test of Wednesbury unreasonableness,9 and that are not considered

9 *Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v. Wednesbury Corporation* [1948] 1 KB 223.

to be very stringent. The addition of the third prong (proportionality *stricto sensu*) is what is supposed to make the judicial test of proportionality more stringent. It requires an analysis of the costs and benefits of infringing someone's right *across* persons, not just from the point of view of the right-holder, and hence bears close resemblance to utilitarian calculations. Here is how judge Aharon Barak, a former judge of the Israeli Supreme Court, describes this part of the orthodox test in a recent book on proportionality:

The last test of proportionality is the 'proportional result' or 'proportionality *stricto sensu*' (*Verhaltnismassigkeit im engeren Sinne*). . .[A]ccording to proportionality stricto sensu, in order to justify a limitation on a constitutional right, a proper relation ('proportional in the narrow sense of the term'), should exist between the benefits gained by fulfilling the purpose and the harm caused to the constitutional right from obtaining that purpose. This test requires a balancing of the benefits gained by the public and the harm caused to the constitutional right through the use of the means selected by law to obtain the proper purpose. Accordingly, this is a test balancing benefits and harm.10

So we can say that the orthodox view of proportionality consists in two main claims:

- (1) Proportionality *stricto sensu* ('balancing') is a test that speaks to the limitation, rather than the content of rights (*the Balancing Orthodoxy*).
- (2) Rights may justifiably be limited if the overall societal benefits of limiting them exceeds the cost of the harm done to the person whose right it is (*the Maximizing Orthodoxy*).

As evidenced by the label (*Verhaltnismassigkeit im engeren Sinne*), this orthodoxy originated in German constitutional theory and has received theoretical support in the work of the German constitutional scholar, Robert Alexy.11 It has been very influential in many jurisdictions (Europe, Canada, Israel, South Africa), becoming Germany's biggest exporting legal doctrine, the BMW of constitutional theory. According to the orthodoxy, proportionality does not offer an account of what rights you have; rather, it offers an account of how they can be taken *away* from you. Moreover, the orthodoxy offers a specific account of when rights may be justifiably limited: If the cost of interfering with someone's right is minor and the benefits to the collective good are huge, then the right may be infringed. But if the cost of interference is high and the benefits to the collective good are minor, then the right should be upheld.

The idea that the conditions for justifiably limiting constitutional or human rights are imposed by the need to maximize some good figures prominently in the work of Robert Alexy, though it is less clear what he takes the *maximand* to be. Alexy argues

<sup>10</sup> Aharon Barak, *Proportionality* (Cambridge University Press, 2012), 340.

<sup>11</sup> See Robert Alexy, *A Theory of Constitutional Rights* (Oxford University Press, 2002); Robert Alexy, 'Constitutional Rights, Balancing and Rationality', *Ratio Juris*, 16 (2003): 131; See also Mattias Kumm, 'Institutionalizing Socratic Contestation, The Rationalist Human Rights Paradigm, Legitimate Authority and the Point of Judicial Review', *European Journal of Legal Studies*, 1 (December 2007).

that many constitutional rights in the German Constitution are principles, rather than rules, and that principles are *optimization* requirements. He writes:

Principles are optimization requirements relative to what is legally and factually possible. The *principle of proportionality in its narrow sense*, that is, the requirement of balancing, derives from its relation to the *legally* possible . . .[T]he *principle of proportionality in its narrow sense* follows from the fact that principles are optimization requirements relative to what is legally possible.12

Alexy's optimization requirement is constrained by a proviso about what is 'legally possible'. But this proviso is ambiguous. Understood to mean what is legally *permissible*, it is either question-begging or clearly wrong. If it means legally permissible as matter of *human rights law*, then the proviso is circular. Proportionality is meant to determine what human rights law permits and we cannot define it in terms of what human rights law permits. If, on the other hand, Alexy's proviso means what is permissible under other areas of law (say criminal law, or administrative law, or tort law) then it is clearly wrong: human rights law is used to judge the constitutionality (or lawfulness) of other areas of law and we cannot assume that what these areas require is lawful. Suppose that a human rights challenge is launched against a criminal statute that prohibits blasphemous remarks made about the dominant religion. Is the task of optimizing free speech constrained by what criminal law requires, such that there is, automatically, no free speech right to blaspheme? This cannot be right and it is not clear to me what else Alexy could mean by 'legally possible'.

Be that as it may, the orthodox understanding of proportionality has made it very unpopular amongst scholars who reject utilitarianism and defend rights as resistant to utilitarian calculations. Some commentators have equated proportionality with this orthodoxy, then equated the orthodoxy with utilitarianism, and then concluded that proportionality is the enemy of rights.13 This criticism is valid, insofar as it is directed against utilitarian or consequentialist approaches to rights. Surely, my right to criticize the government or practice my religion shouldn't depend on a cost–benefit calculation of how important it is to me to have this right compared to how important it is to others that I do not have it. Surely, it is not even *relevant* whether others prefer it if I don't practice my religion or don't express my political views. So the orthodoxy is deeply mistaken to the extent that it advocates cost–benefit analysis that takes the form of maximization of preference satisfaction or optimization of interests. But we should be charitable here. The *Maximizing Orthodoxy* is just a piece of unsophisticated doctrinal jargon about legal rights. It is an attempt to reconstruct what courts say when adjudicating rights, rather than an essay in the philosophy of rights. We shouldn't read too much into it, out of some excessive liberal preoccupation with the moral defects of utilitarianism. In particular, we should avoid making two unwarranted equations: first to equate balancing with utilitarian reasoning. And second, to equate judicial tests courts use to decide cases (which is an *epistemic* or heuristic task),

<sup>12</sup> Alexy (2002), 67.

<sup>13</sup> See, eg, Stavros Tsakyrakis, 'Proportionality: an Assault on Human Rights?', *International Journal of Constitutional Law*, 7 (2009): 468.

with a theory of what human rights we have (which is a *constitutive* moral question). Let me discuss these two unwarranted equations in turn.

We should begin by observing that only the second orthodox claim (the *Maximizing Orthodoxy*) is tied to an overtly utilitarian outlook. The first orthodox claim—ie, that proportionality speaks to the balancing and limitation of rights—need not be premised on utilitarian grounds. One can accept that pro tanto moral rights may sometimes be balanced against other considerations and be justifiably infringed, while rejecting that it is ever permissible to do so merely in order to maximize overall utility. This is not an incoherent view. For example, it could be argued that it is morally justified to break a promise to meet someone for lunch on the basis that one has to take his child to the doctor. But it is not justified to break the promise on the basis that the aggregated happiness of the promisor and others (for example, that of his child and his child's friends whom the promisor decides to takes to the park instead of keeping his promise) exceeds the unhappiness caused to the promisee by the breach. Believing that pro tanto rights may sometimes be justifiably infringed does not commit one to the view that the conditions for infringement consist in the maximization of some good across persons, let alone the maximization of *happiness* or *preferencesatisfaction*. In other words, balancing (or trade-offs) needn't be *utilitarian*, seeking to maximize things like happiness or preference satisfaction.14 The *Balancing Orthodoxy* is independent from the *Maximising Orthodoxy*.

Second, the *Balancing Orthodoxy* may in practice have little to do with real balancing. This is because it needn't be an accurate description of what human rights courts actually do. Human rights courts may speak of 'balancing' the cost to the right of the individual against the benefit to the public, while ending up routinely upholding rights that a utilitarian would not. Contrary to the unsophisticated orthodoxy, we should be mainly concerned with what courts *do*, not what they *say*. Consider for example the European Court of Human Rights. Looking at its case law, one finds numerous cases in which upholding an individual right goes against the preferences of the majority. Just to offer a few examples, the Court has recognized the right of juveniles not to be subjected to corporal punishment,15 the right of children born out of wedlock to be treated on equal terms with children born in wedlock,16 the right of homosexuals to engage in sexual activities free from criminal prosecution,17 the right of post-operation transsexuals to have their new gender recognized by law,18 the right of religious minorities to practice their religion free from criminal persecution,19 the right of homosexuals to be eligible for single-parent adoption on equal terms with heterosexuals,20 the right of prisoners not to lose the right to vote indiscriminately and automatically upon conviction.21 These judicial outcomes are hardly compatible with an overtly utilitarian conception of proportionality. They recognize rights of minority

<sup>14</sup> On how trade-offs operate within deontological moral frameworks see Judith Jarvis Thomson, *The Realm of Rights* (Harvard University Press, 1992), ch. 6.

<sup>15</sup> *Tyrer v. United Kingdom* (1978) 2 EHRR 1. 16 *Marckx v. Belgium* (1979) 2 EHRR 330.

<sup>17</sup> *Dudgeon v. United Kingdom* (1982) 4 EHRR 149*; Modinos v. Cyprus* (1993) 16 EHRR 485.

<sup>18</sup> *Goodwin v. UK* (1996) 22 EHRR 123. 19 *Kokkinakis v. Greece* (1994) 17 EHRR 397.

<sup>20</sup> *E.B. v. France* (2008), Application No 43546/02.

<sup>21</sup> *Hirst v. United Kingdom* (2005) ECHR 681.

groups (juveniles, children born out of wedlock, religious minorities, homosexuals, foreigners, transsexuals, prisoners) to exercise certain liberties, or enjoy some benefit, despite the fact that the majority has a preference against the minority doing so. If the effect of the test of proportionality *stricto sensu* (balancing) were to lead the Court to seek to maximize happiness or preference satisfaction for the greatest number of people, then we would not have such results. Yet not only has the Court upheld rights of minority groups against majoritarian preferences, but it has also done so without assigning much weight to the fact that such majoritarian preferences exist within the applicant's state, and without requiring an explicit consensus amongst most contracting states to recognize such rights.22 Notice moreover that in these cases the Court's language was one of 'balancing' the right of the applicant against some public interest. If what went on there had been real balancing then the result would have been very different.

It follows that when courts talk of 'balancing' rights against other considerations, what they often mean is that they are considering (which is an *epistemic* task) the effect of a measure upon the interests of both applicant and society at large, with a view to discover what moral rights people have (which is a *constitutive* task). But considering something is not the same as assigning normative weight to it. One way to read these anti-majoritarian judgments is that the court considered ('balanced' in its own language) the negative effect of legalizing an activity (such as homosexual acts) on the preferences of the majority and found it *irrelevant*. Of course, moral philosophers would know better than to use the word 'balancing' to describe the epistemic task of considering. For from a normative point of view, only considerations with real moral weight can be balanced. But judges and constitutional lawyers are not moral philosophers and we should be charitable towards what they say.

Nor can it be argued that human rights courts should *never* consider the effect of a state measure on the majority's interests. For that effect can sometimes be morally relevant with respect to what moral rights one has, even on a non-utilitarian view. Consider for example Ronald Dworkin's principle that one should not suffer severe restrictions on his interests for the sake of marginal or speculative gains to the interests of others.23 On Dworkin's view, there is no moral right to any specific liberty or interest but there is a moral right not to be deprived of a liberty on the basis of certain considerations, including on the basis that the restriction produces marginal or speculative gains to the interests of others. For example, it is wrong to prohibit pornography if it has only a speculative effect on increasing violence against women. So to discover what moral rights we have, an inquiry into the effect of a measure on the interests of others may be relevant. Courts and constitutional lawyers might mischaracterize this inquiry as the task of 'balancing' rights against societal gains. This is a mischaracterization because, to use the same example, it is not the case that one has a pro tanto moral right to consume pornography *simpliciter*, ie, independently of the effects on the interests of others. Nor is it the case that the right not to be deprived of

<sup>22</sup> I have argued that this is the case in George Letsas, 'The ECHR as a Living Instrument: its Meaning and Legitimacy', in Andreas Follesdal et al. (eds.), *Constituting Europe* (Cambridge University Press, 2013).

<sup>23</sup> Ronald Dworkin, *Taking Rights Seriously* (Duckworth, 1977), 269.

the liberty to consume pornography on the basis of a mere speculation about the effect on the interests of women is to be balanced against *anything*—let alone against the majority's (or women's) distaste of pornography. But so long as courts uphold the right to consume pornography in the absence of clear evidence of immediate harm, as they in fact do, then the difference is terminological.

To be sure, the language of balancing also figures in cases where the Court assigned weight to factors that are either morally irrelevant or morally impermissible to consider. For example, the European Court has failed to uphold the right of someone to engage in non-harmful activities that others find blasphemous (such as publish books,24 screen movies,25 exhibit art,26 or place radio advertisements),27 citing how much the activity offends the majority. The outcome in these cases has been morally indefensible from a non-utilitarian liberal perspective, depriving the applicants of fundamental rights of free speech and freedom of religion. And the Court's reasoning there looks a lot like a direct utilitarian calculation. But it is questionable whether the orthodox language of balancing rights against societal benefits is to blame for these unjustified outcomes. After all, this language has not prevented the reaching of correct outcomes in the other cases mentioned earlier. Whether a different test, lacking the balancing connotations, would have produced more correct results is an empirical question that may vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Judicial tests employed by human rights courts are diagnostic institutional tools that help the courts reach outcomes.28 It is a mistake to equate them directly with theories of what rights people have. Like with any diagnostic test, part of what makes the use of a judicial test morally defensible is how many false negatives and false positives it produces compared to alternative tests.29 Whether the language of balancing, as used in Europe and elsewhere, produces worse results than possible alternatives (say the test of strict scrutiny of the US Supreme Court) is an empirical question which cannot be settled by armchair reflection.

In sum, the problem with the orthodox account of proportionality is not so much that it has utilitarian connotations or that it encourages utilitarian thinking. Rather, the problem is that it is a misleadingly vacuous metaphor. All that it really says, charitably interpreted, is that courts should consider the effect of an impugned measure on the interests of others, as well as on the interests of the applicant. This is not a moral principle, nor is it an account of what moral rights we have and when they can be overridden. Considering something is not the same as assigning normative weight on it. The content of some moral rights may sometimes, constitutively, turn on the effect of a measure on the interests of others. The orthodox test allows courts to consider such effects but it does not specify which effects and interests count and under which conditions. Whether courts will assign normative weight to the wrong effects (for example, the prejudices and bias of the majority) and ignore the morally relevant ones depends

24 *I.A. v. Turkey* (2007) 45 EHRR 967.

25 *Otto-Preminger Institute v. Austria* (1995) 19 EHRR 34.

26 *Muller and others v. Switzerland* (1991) 13 EHRR 212.

27 *Murphy v. Ireland* (2004) 38 EHRR 212.

28 For a more detailed defense of this view see George Letsas, 'The Scope and Balancing of Rights: Diagnostic or Constitutive?', in Janneke Gerards and Eva Brems (eds.), *Shaping Rights in the ECHR* (Cambridge University Press, 2013).

29 Letsas, 'The Scope and Balancing of Rights'.

on how good the court in question is. Criticizing the orthodox test on the basis that it gets the nature of human rights wrong makes the mistake of elevating the orthodox test to a level that it does not deserve. It makes the mistake of treating the test as a constitutive theory of rights. But the orthodox doctrinal view that we have a human right to pretty much everything, which is to be balanced against pretty much everything, is so daftly implausible as a theory of rights that it is not even worth criticizing. We do better to ignore the vacuous orthodoxy and analyze judicial outcomes in the light of first-order normative arguments about the nature of human rights as moral rights.

## **IV. Proportionality Beyond the Orthodoxy: Two Views**

In the previous section I argued that the orthodox understanding of proportionality is vacuous. It is not a utilitarian calculation (at least not necessarily so), nor is it a theory of what rights we have and when they can be overridden. The two orthodox claims (the *Balancing Orthodoxy* and the *Maximizing Orthodoxy*), found in legal doctrine and the academic literature, are not to be taken at face value. The two-stage approach of the judicial test (scope-balancing), and the language of balancing rights and public interest, is merely a rough conceptual framework that courts use in order to discover what rights litigants have. The framework has not precluded courts from recognizing and upholding strong anti-majoritarian moral rights.

Still, we have to give an account of what it is that courts actually do when they adjudicate on rights. Even if the orthodox view of proportionality is vacuous, having little or no moral substance, we still need to give a normative explanation of the nature of the courts' task. Suppose that there were no history of rights-based judicial review. What is it that courts *should* be doing, were we to institute one now? It is unlikely that what courts actually do departs radically from what they should be doing, from the point of view of ideal morality. In this respect, we should be able to explain the popularity and pervasiveness of the doctrinal test courts use (scope and balancing), rough and loose as it may be, as an imperfect attempt to capture the moral nature of human rights. And we should recall that the second sense of proportionality I identified in the second section of the paper links it to moral values (such as democracy or retribution) that determine constitutively what rights people have. Any attempt to reconstruct what courts do under the heading of proportionality should therefore begin with normative arguments about the nature of human rights as moral rights made *independently* of legal practice. The best reconstruction of the legal doctrine of proportionality is one that begins outside the four corners of courts' judgments. Two options are open in this regard.

The first is to take a popular view about the moral nature of human rights that is teleological. Rights protect objective interests of individual well-being that are important enough to impose duties on others.30 To have an interest is a necessary but not

<sup>30</sup> Joseph Raz, *The Morality of Freedom* (Clarendon Press, 1986). Interestingly, Raz's view about human rights is that they denote a narrower set of rights, those whose violation warrants some kind of external interference with the sovereignty of the infringing state. See his 'Human Rights Without Foundations' in Samantha Besson and John Tasioulas (eds.), *Philosophical Foundations of International Law* (Oxford University Press, 2010).

sufficient for the existence of a right. The conditions for when an interest generates a right depend on factors such as the nature of the interest and how demanding it is to impose a duty on others to respect or promote it.31 On the interest-based view of rights, the test of proportionality can be seen as an umbrella term that encompasses an inquiry into whether the applicant's claim relates to an objective interest of well-being which is such that it imposes duties on the government (or private individuals). For example, in the case of *Hatton*, the test of proportionality would on this view be about whether the interest to sleep at night free from loud noise is important enough to impose a duty on the government to ban night flights, taking into account also what burdens this entails for others. Interestingly, whether the imposition of a duty on others to serve someone's interest entails heavy burdens on them would always be relevant for determining what human rights people have on this theory of rights. This means that a type of cost–benefit analysis would be part and parcel of what courts would have to do to discover what human rights we have, albeit of a cost–benefit analysis of non-utilitarian kind. According to the teleological theory of rights, costs and benefits are moralized notions, viewed from the objective standpoint of the importance of different interests for our well-being and without being committed to the need to maximize the serving of those interests.

The second option is a non-teleological theory that denies that the point of rights is to protect interests of individual well-being. Rather, it insists that the most fundamental moral right individuals have against the government, from which more specific requirements follow, is the right to be treated with equal respect and concern, in Ronald Dworkin's famous formulation. This conception of rights is known as a reason-blocking theory:32 rights tell us which facts do not constitute valid reasons for depriving someone of a liberty or an opportunity or for imposing a risk on him. For example, the fact that the majority dislikes pornography or homosexuality is not a valid reason for banning these activities. The reason-blocking theory is often misunderstood as a claim solely about the motivation of the acting agent. It is then objected that certain actions (say torture or censorship of political speech) are violations of rights, regardless of the motives of the acting agent. The objection is based on a misunderstanding of the word 'reason'. The reason-blocking theory uses the concept of a reason in a normative, not a motivating sense. The theory argues that certain empirical facts are not normative reasons for action in virtue of the value of equal respect and concern and the status of individuals as beings with inherent dignity.33 On the reason-blocking theory of rights, the judicial test of proportionality is an inquiry into whether the government offended the status of the applicant as an equal member of his political community whose dignity matters. Consider *Hatton* for example. Under the reason-blocking theory the question would be this: did the UK's scheme of night flights violate the applicant's right to be treated with equal respect and concern? This is not a question about whether Ms Hatton's interest in sleep is strong enough to stop

<sup>31</sup> See John Tasioulas, this volume, ch. 1.

<sup>32</sup> See George Letsas, *A Theory of Interpretation of the European Convention on Human Rights* (Oxford University Press, 2009), ch. 5.

<sup>33</sup> Ronald Dworkin, *Justice for Hedgehogs* (Harvard University Press, 2011).

the rest of us from flying during the night. Rather, it is a question about the fairness of the scheme of night flights and whether the scheme showed contempt for the equal status of the applicant.

It is beyond the scope of this paper to defend, at the moral level, the reason-blocking theory of rights over its rival, the interest-based theory. I do however wish to argue, in the remainder of this paper, that the reason-blocking theory captures better than its rival a very large part of what courts decide under the heading of proportionality. This is not, by itself, an argument in favour of the reason-blocking theory. It does suggest however that proportionality can be understood not merely as a heuristic device for determining what rights we have but also as denoting a moral value (equal respect and concern) that partly *constitutes* what rights we have against the government.

There are at least two areas of human rights cases in which the right to equal respect and concern plays a constitutive role in determining the moral rights of the applicant against the government. The first category includes cases in which the government has employed a blanket or indiscriminate measure that prevents it from taking into account morally relevant considerations. The second category includes cases in which the government has taken into account considerations that are normally irrelevant to what equal respect and concern requires of government in its core functions. These include so-called suspect grounds, such as one's race, religion, and sexual orientation. But they also include a number of other considerations such as one's political or philosophical beliefs, one's conception of the good life, one's lifestyle choices, one's traits of character, one's looks, one's genetic or biological condition, one's immigration status, and many others. Absent special circumstances (for example, affirmative action programs), governmental action is wrongful when grounded on such considerations.

## **V. Proportionality as the Right to Equal Respect and Concern I: Indiscriminate Measures**

In 2001, Mr Michael Marper was arrested and charged with harassing his partner. The police took his fingerprints and a sample of his DNA. Soon after, he was reconciled with his partner who pressed no charges. A few months later the Crown Prosecution Service dropped the charges against him. The same year another person, Mr S., was arrested and charged with attempted robbery. The police took his fingerprints and a sample of his DNA. He was at the time eleven years old. Within less than a year, he was tried and found innocent of the crime of which he was accused. After the end of their respective run-ins with the authorities, both Mr Marper and Mr S. asked the police to destroy their fingerprints and DNA samples from their database. The police refused. Section 64 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) had changed the previous position of English law, which required the police to destroy DNA samples of unconvicted suspects. Mr S. and Mr Marper applied for judicial review seeking a judicial order to have their samples destroyed. They invoked Article 8 ECHR, as incorporated by the Human Rights Act 1998 (HRA), which protects the right to private life. The Administrative Court decided to reject their request and the Court of Appeal upheld the decision. The case reached the House of Lords on appeal.

Lord Steyn gave the leading speech in the House of Lords. He applied the standard two-stage doctrinal test of proportionality. Regarding the first stage (the *definitional* or *scope* stage), Lord Steyn found that the retention of DNA samples either does not interfere at all with private life or does so in a very minor way. Regarding the second stage (the *limitation* stage), he found that the interference—insofar as there was one—promoted a legitimate aim: keeping a database of DNA samples helps the authorities to solve and prosecute serious crimes and to exculpate the innocent. He also found that the interference was proportionate to the aim pursued, on the basis that it confers enormous advantages in the fight against serious crime. Indeed, Lord Steyn gave examples of cases where, if DNA samples had been destroyed, the authorities would not have been able to detect serious crimes. According to the statistics he gave, approximately 6,000 DNA samples that would have been destroyed under the previous, more restrictive, legal regime were linked to crime-scene stains. These included fifty-five murders, thirty-three attempted murders, and ninety-four rapes.

We can see in Lord Steyn's approach the lingering infection of the orthodox view about proportionality. Lord Steyn balanced the cost to the appellants' right to private life against the benefit to the public interest. Given how many serious crimes we can solve by retaining DNA samples and given how minor the interference is with the suspects' private life, proportionality—thus understood—requires finding no violation. The idea of proportionality as cost-effectiveness looms large in this approach: minor costs, major benefits, *ergo* no human rights violation. Baroness Hale dissented, holding that there was a violation of the appellants' human right to private life. She did not however dispute the cost–benefit character of the test of proportionality that Lord Steyn applied. Rather, she thought that the cost to the appellants' right to private life was substantial, because in her view few things, if anything, are more private than knowing and controlling one's own genetic make-up.

In 2004, Mr S. and Mr Marper took their cases to the European Court of Human Rights claiming that their right to private life under Article 8 ECHR had been violated.34 In its judgment, the European Court had no difficulty acknowledging the importance of DNA samples and profiles in detecting and prosecuting serious crimes. It also accepted the UK government's submission that keeping the DNA of unconvicted suspects has contributed to the detection and prevention of crime.35 It nevertheless decided that the interference with the applicants' private life was *disproportionate*, amounting to a violation of their human rights.

How could the Court justify this decision? The Court accepted that retaining the DNA samples of unconvicted suspects secures a substantial societal advantage in the fight against crime. Unlike Baroness Hale on the other hand, it did not place emphasis on the interest people have to keep information about their genetic make-up private. Besides, whatever value that interest has, it is the same whether or not one has been convicted of a crime. And the question that interested the Court was not whether, in general, it is permissible for the government to retain DNA samples. The question was whether it was permissible to retain the DNA of *unconvicted* persons. We

<sup>34</sup> *S. and Marper v. United Kingdom* (2009) 48 EHRR 1169.

<sup>35</sup> *S. and Marper v. United Kingdom*, para 117.

cannot assume that unconvicted persons have less of an interest in keeping their genetic make-up private. If the policy of retention were impermissible solely in virtue of the importance of that interest, then it would be impermissible for *both* convicted and unconvicted persons. From the point of view of the interest in privacy, we would be unable to distinguish between the two classes. Nor could we distinguish between them on the basis of the benefit to the public interest (fighting crime). For there was no evidence that the DNA of convicted persons matched crime scenes more often than that of unconvicted persons. If proportionality were supposed to govern the relationship between the cost to one's interest in privacy on one hand and the benefit to public interest on the other, then retaining the DNA of the applicants in *S. and Marper* would be as proportionate as retaining the DNA of a convicted murderer. We would have to conclude, with Lord Steyn and against the European Court that the UK did not violate the human rights of Mr S. and Mr Marper.

But of course, that is exactly the reason why proportionality does *not*, contrary to the orthodoxy, mean *cost-effectiveness*. The outcome in *S. and Marper* is perfectly justified if we understand it, as I propose: *proportionality as the right to equal respect and concern*. To see this we should unpack the Court's dictum that it was 'struck by the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the power of retention in England and Wales'.36 To say that the policy is indiscriminate is to say that it fails to discriminate between people who have a moral *right* to be treated differently based on their circumstances. What were these circumstances?

To begin with, the applicants were never convicted of the crimes of which they were accused. Moreover, they were accused of crimes that, compared to rape or murder, were of minor gravity: harassment of one's partner and attempted robbery by a minor. When they were arrested, at *t1*, the fact that they were reasonably suspected of a crime was a valid ground for the authorities to take their DNA material. But at *t2*, when they were acquitted (or the charges were dropped) that ground ceased to exist. So at *t2*, the authorities had no valid justification for keeping the applicants' DNA and they ought to have destroyed it. Just like the visitor to your house whom you invited and now you ask to leave, they ought to do it as soon as possible. Now contrast their circumstances to those of a convicted murderer. The convicted murderer doesn't get to *t2*. The fact that he was convicted of a serious crime gives the authorities a valid justification to retain his DNA. The convicted murderer is liable to be treated like that because his circumstances are different: he was proven to be guilty of a very serious wrong.37 Though not a form of punishment, indefinite retention of his DNA is justified given the gravity of his wrong. He is fairly treated. This is the territory of proportionality as a normative notion, determining moral rights and duties: the nature and intensity of our reaction to someone's wrong ought to co-relate with the gravity of their wrong. By retaining however the DNA of unconvicted persons, we treat them the same way as we treat people convicted of serious crimes and that is unfair. We fail to take into account a very important aspect of their circumstances. Here is how the Court put it:

<sup>36</sup> *S. and Marper v United Kingdom*, para 119.

<sup>37</sup> I am grateful to Massimo Renzo for suggesting to me that the normative position of suspects and wrongdoers is one of liability rather than desert.

#### *George Letsas* 333

. . .[t]he Court must bear in mind that the right of every person under the Convention to be presumed innocent includes the general rule that no suspicion regarding an accused's innocence may be voiced after his acquittal. It is true that the retention of the applicants' private data cannot be equated with the voicing of suspicions. Nonetheless, their perception that they are not being treated as innocent is heightened by the fact that their data are retained indefinitely in the same way as the data of convicted persons, while the data of those who have never been suspected of an offence are required to be destroyed.

The point here is not that the applicants suffered an emotional harm, feeling that they were being stigmatized as wrongdoers or prone to crime. They may or may not have felt like that. The point is that they had a *reason* to feel aggrieved because they were treated unjustly. They were treated like murderers. Whether or not this actually bothered them is neither here nor there, in the same way that it is neither here nor there whether it bothers me that my guest refuses to leave my house upon my request. I am being wronged regardless of my emotional reaction. Note moreover that the wrong the applicants suffered would not disappear if the authorities decided to retain *everyone*'s DNA indefinitely. Doing so would simply amount to wronging everyone except those convicted of serious crimes. For only those people are liable to this kind of treatment.

Another dimension of the government's policy is worth mentioning here. Placing *anyone'*s DNA details in a database that is used to match future crime-scene evidence, exposes him to a certain risk: it increases one's chances of being unjustly implicated in a future crime, either by mistake (your DNA was in the vicinity of a crime but you had nothing to do with it) or because of police abuse (they are known to plant evidence to 'solve' crimes). Those who are convicted of a serious crime are liable to be exposed to this risk, given what they have done, just like they are liable to receive punishment. Though not in itself a form of punishment, exposing convicted wrongdoers to this risk is an appropriate reaction to what they have done (and have been proved to have done). By contrast, those who are innocent should not be liable to be exposed to this serious risk, just like they should not be liable to receive punishment. Retaining indefinitely the DNA of suspects who were never convicted is treating them *as if* they have committed a serious crime. The government apportions a risk in an unjust way.

Note moreover that the distinction between convicted and unconvicted persons was not the only relevant one that the government's policy, being blanket, was unable to take into account. It is also relevant if a particular defendant is a minor, if he is accused of a minor '*malum prohibitum*' crime, if there is no indication that he will re-offend, and so on and so forth. Hence, the blanket character of the UK government's scheme was bound to offend justice. Here is how the Court put it:

The material may be retained irrespective of the nature or gravity of the offence with which the individual was originally suspected or of the age of the suspected offender; fingerprints and samples may be taken— and retained—from a person of any age, arrested in connection with a recordable offence, which includes minor or non-imprisonable offences.

The *S. and Marper* case illustrates that *proportionality as the right to equal respect and concern* is an ingredient of the moral right applicants have in human rights cases. To put it precisely: the applicants in *S. and Marper* had a moral right that their DNA material be treated justly, ie, in a way that was sensitive to their circumstances: the fact that they were never convicted, the fact that they were charged with minor wrongs (harassment of one's partner and attempted robbery by a minor), the age of Mr S., and others. The government's blanket scheme violated this right by treating the applicants in the same way as someone who had committed a very serious crime: they put their DNA in the database indefinitely, which is not an appropriate response given the applicants' circumstances.

The above normative explanation of the outcome in *S. and Marper* bears all the features of *proportionality as the right to equal respect and concern*. First, it is moral judgment about how the authorities ought to have treated the applicants in the light of their actions and circumstances. Second, it grounds a moral right that the applicants had, even if society would benefit substantially by not respecting this right. Recall that the Court accepted that retaining the DNA of unconvicted persons contributed significantly to the detection and prevention of crime. Yet for the Court, that was neither here nor there. Third, the applicants were wronged regardless of whether their privacy interest was harmed.

Note further that this normative justification has nothing to do with balancing rights. It is not the case that the applicants had a right to keep their DNA private, which was then balanced against the need to fight crime and was found to be weightier. The justification I propose makes no reference to an alleged right to keep one's DNA private, whatever that means. On the contrary, it assumes no such right and it finds no rights issue—let alone a violation—in the case of a convicted murderer whose DNA material is kept in the database indefinitely; he is liable to be treated in this way just like he is liable to be sentenced to life imprisonment. Neither treatment violates any of his rights. It is important here to set aside another misconception that often underlies the orthodox obsession with balancing. It is the idea that there is a general right to liberty. This idea is presented as a valid legal statement in the context of German constitutional law, encompassing the alleged right to feed pigeons in a public park.38 As a moral statement however this idea has been discredited.39 Dworkin gives the example of the government that makes a street one-way, restricting people's liberty to drive both ways; this restriction does not interfere with anyone's rights.40 Nor are my rights violated when the government takes away the liberty to murder, torture or rape without criminal sanctions.

I should finally stress that I have chosen *S. and Marper* as just one out of the numerous cases in which the European Court of Human Rights has found state measures disproportionate *qua* indiscriminate and blanket. The public's perception of these cases is often led astray by being told that the Court recognized a right to the resource to which the indiscriminate measures relates. For example, in the controversial case

<sup>38</sup> See Alexy, *A Theory of Constitutional Rights*, ch. 8.

<sup>39</sup> Dworkin, *Taking Rights Seriously*, ch. 12.

<sup>40</sup> Dworkin's example, Dworkin, *Taking Rights Seriously*, ch. 12.

of *Hirst v. United Kingdom*, the public was told that the Court recognized the human rights of prisoners to vote. But of course, that it is an inaccurate description of the ratio of the judgment. All that the Court said is that the ban on prisoners' voting cannot be blanket and indiscriminate, applying automatically upon receiving a prison sentence and regardless of the duration of that sentence or the nature of the offence. And of course that's the only thing that the Court *could* have justifiably decided. For if I am right, all that the applicants had a right to was to an egalitarian scheme of crime prevention, not to any specific object of that scheme.

## **VI. Proportionality as the Right to Equal Respect and Concern II: Irrelevant Factors**

In December 1985 a man identifying himself as Klaus Wegner sent a letter to Judge Miosga of the Freising District Court in Germany. The letter was signed on behalf of the *Freiburg Bunte Liste* ('Multi-colored Group'), a local political party. It contained a strong, anti-clerical, criticism of criminal proceedings pending before Judge Miosga against a man described as 'Mr J.'. Mr J., an atheist, had refused on ethical grounds to pay church tax for his employees. The authorities charged him with the criminal offence of 'insulting behavior'. The letter accused Judge Miosga of abusing his office in order to 'try—by means which give a warning and a reminder of the darkest chapters of German legal history—to break the backbone of an unloved opponent of the Church'. In January 1986 the authorities charged the author of the letter, Klaus Wegner, with a criminal offence (the same as that used against Mr J.), but were unable to establish his real identity. Six months later the authorities obtained a warrant to search the office of a man called Gottfried Niemietz. Niemietz was a practising lawyer who had been chairman of the *Freiburg Bunte Liste* for some years. The authorities searched his law office thoroughly, going through all his files, but found no documents pointing to the identity of Klaus Wegner. Niemietz told them that he had 'already destroyed them'. Niemietz later challenged the lawfulness of the search before the German courts, claiming that his constitutional rights had been violated. His claim was rejected. The President of the Munich District Court said that the search was *proportionate* because the letter constituted a serious interference with a pending case. In 1988, Niemietz took his case to the European Court of Human Rights, complaining that the German authorities had violated his human rights to 'private life, home and correspondence' under Article 8 ECHR.

In its judgment, the Court formally followed the two-stage orthodox test. It first examined whether the search amounted to an interference with the rights protected under Article 8 ECHR (the *scope* stage). It rejected the respondent state's submission that the search of business premises falls outside the scope of Article 8, offering a number of different arguments: first, that it is in the course of their professional activities that people have the opportunity to develop relationships of private nature with others. Second, that it is not always easy in modern societies to distinguish between one's professional and one's private life. Third, that the essential object and purpose of Article 8 ECHR is to 'protect the individual against arbitrary interference by the public authorities'. And fourth, that the text of Article 8 ECHR does not limit correspondence to *private* correspondence and hence the scope of the right also includes professional correspondence of the kind that existed in the applicant's business premises when it was searched. On the basis of the above arguments, the Court concluded that the respondent state had interfered with the applicant's right under Article 8 ECHR.

Having found that there was an interference with the rights protected under Article 8 ECHR, the Court turned to the question of whether the interference was justified as 'necessary in a democratic society' (the *limitation* stage). It held that the restriction to the applicant's right to private life and correspondence was disproportionate to the aims of preventing crime and protecting the honor of Judge Miosga. The Court based its decision on a number of considerations: that the warrant had been drawn in broad terms; that German law did not impose any special procedural safeguards on searches (such as the presence of independent observers); that the search impinged on the applicant's professional secrecy (lawyer–client confidentiality) which in turn may affect fair trial rights under Article 6 ECHR; finally, that the publicity surrounding the search could potentially harm Mr Niemietz's professional reputation. It concluded that the applicant's rights under Article 8 ECHR had been violated.

How do we best explain what made the actions of the German authorities disproportionate? If the question was whether the benefit to solving crimes was higher than the cost of the interference with the applicant's privacy, then the German courts would have been right to find the search proportionate. It was the only way to determine who the author of the letter was and it had little impact on the applicant's privacy (this was his office, not his home). But if the question was whether being an atheist who criticizes church tax is *relevant* to how authorities should use their power to search people's property (homes or offices), then the answer is different. One's philosophical or political beliefs are not relevant to how the state should apportion the search of people's premises. It was clear from the facts of the case that the authorities were using their powers of criminal law (prosecution for insulting behavior, investigation, searches) with a view to persecute those who held a particular political view. The search was disproportionate because one's political and philosophical beliefs are *not* a reason to subject him to criminal sanctions. Just like in *S. and Marper* moreover, the injustice done to Mr Niemietz had nothing to do with harm to his privacy interest. The Court did *not* say that the action of the German authorities were disproportionate because the harm to the applicant's privacy was greater than the benefit to the cause of fighting crime. How much Mr Niemietz's privacy interests were affected was neither here nor there.41

It may be objected here that the principle of proportionality is ill-suited to capture the wrongness that Mr Niemietz suffered. On the proposed normative explanation, the problem was that the government pursued an impermissible end (persecuting

<sup>41</sup> The *rationale* that justifies the outcome in *Niemietz* also applies to numerous other judgments of the European Court. The case of *Redfearn v. United Kingdom* concerned the dismissal of a private employee who was a member of the British National Party. English employment law did not allow the applicant to challenge his dismissal as discriminatory on the basis of political belief or political association. The European Court found a violation of Article 11 ECHR (freedom of association). The case of *Sidabras and Dziautas v. Lithuania* concerned a ten-year ban on former KGB agents from both private and public employment. The Court found a violation of Article 8 (right to private life).

atheists) rather than a disproportionate means to achieve a permissible end, as in the case of *S. and Marper* (preventing crime).42 There are two responses to this objection. The first is pragmatic: this is simply what courts do; they use the language of proportionality even when, as in the case of *Niemietz,* the wrongness of the government's action appears to lie in the ends, not the means. It is of little practical significance whether, from a philosophical point of view, such action is best described as wrongful in its ends rather than disproportionate in its means. What matters is that courts carry out this investigation as a fundamental part of their task of upholding rights. Often the presence of considerations that are irrelevant (and hence make state action unjust) is difficult to surmise, as an evidentiary matter. In *Niemietz* it was clear, from the facts of the case, that the authorities used the applicant's political beliefs as the basis for using their criminal law powers. But in other cases there may be evidentiary difficulties.43 And these difficulties are of greater significance in the case of suspect grounds such as race, religion, and sexual orientation. It is part of the role of courts to seek to 'smoke out' such illicit motives, a task whose label varies across jurisdictions.44

The second response to the objection supplies a philosophical justification for why courts are inclined to resort to the language of proportionality in cases like *Niemietz*. In most cases to do with qualified rights (for example, private life, expression, religion, association) the action of government could in principle be permissible. Unlike an act of torture, it is possible that actions like searching people's offices, taking their DNA or sentencing them to life imprisonment do not violate anyone's rights. Such actions normally form part of pursuing the legitimate aims of government, such as promoting safety and security via the enforcement of criminal law. Absent full epistemic access to the facts of each case that might reveal the presence of impermissible reasons, the action of government is prima facie justified as pursuing a legitimate aim. This is why, pending full investigation into the facts of each case, courts have normative reason to take the action of government as pursuing the legitimate aim that it invokes. They take the government's word at face value and then proceed to investigate whether, on the facts of the case, it acted on an irrelevant consideration (for example, the fact it persecuted the applicant's philosophical beliefs in *Niemietz*). Since courts will have already granted that the government's aim is in principle legitimate, they present the finding of any irrelevant (and hence impermissible) considerations as a disproportionate measure in pursuit of a legitimate aim. Are courts conceptually confused? Should they

42 I am grateful to Massimo Renzo for raising this objection.

43 A good example is the case of *E.B. v. France*. The applicant was a lesbian who was refused authorization to adopt by the French authorities. French law allowed single persons to apply for authorization to adopt and granted discretion to authorities to examine individual applications. The applicant was refused on two grounds: first, because of the lack of a paternal referent in the household of the applicant, and second, because of the attitude of the applicant's homosexual partner who expressed no commitment to the adoption plans. The Grand Chamber of the European Court however held that though these two grounds are legitimate in principle, the first ground was used, *in the circumstances of the case*, as a pretext and that it was the applicant's homosexuality that served, implicitly, as a decisive factor leading to the decision of the French authorities to refuse her authorization to adopt.

44 The idea of smoking out illicit motives figures prominently in US constitutional theory. Richard Fallon has argued that it underlies both the test of strict scrutiny of the US Supreme Court and the test of proportionality as applied in Europe and elsewhere, arguing that the test is in effect the same. See Richard Fallon, 'Strict Judicial Scrutiny' 54 *UCLA Law Review*, 1267 (2007).

instead conclude that the action of government turned out *not* to be in pursuit of legitimate aim, as they had originally granted? Hardly. Recall that the normative notion of proportionality is subservient to whatever moral principle governs the practice in question.45 In human rights law, its conceptual meaning is fixed by the moral value governing the egalitarian duties of government. If proportionality properly captures the wrongness of failing to take into account what are relevant considerations given the duties of government (as in *Marper*), then it also captures the wrongness of taking into account irrelevant considerations (as in *Niemietz*). The former is the flip side of the latter. There is little point resisting the use of the label of proportionality here on the basis of some fixed semantic content of the concept.

## **VII. The Moral Merits of the Scope Test**

According to the reading of the cases that I propose, the effect of the government's action on the applicants' interests is not constitutive of their right under the ECHR. For example, in *S. and Marper*, the ratio that I propose does not draw on the applicants' interest to keep their DNA private, let alone assume that this interest was balanced against something else. Recall that the importance of this interest was in Baroness Hale's view what was the relevant human rights issue in this case. I argued earlier that the risk to which one is exposed by having his DNA included in the database is not the risk of suffering harm to one's privacy. It is the risk of being unjustly accused and convicted. To be sure, having one's DNA included on the police database does normally mean that one worries about it. But notice the direction of this worry: one has *reason* to worry because he is exposed to a higher risk of being implicated in a crime that he has not committed. What matters is not that the applicants worried about their DNA material but that the government had given them normative *reason* to worry, whether or not they did worry.46 And the problem with the government's action was not that it gave them reason to worry, but that it *unjustly* gave them reason to worry. For government is fully justified in giving precisely this reason to convicted murderers.47

I am emphasizing the absence of a privacy interest here in order to challenge another part of the orthodox test. Recall that according to this test we should first ask whether there was an interference with a liberty or interest that falls within the protected scope of the relevant right (the *definitional* or *scope* stage), before we ask whether that interference was justified. But in *S. and Marper* it was not the case that the policy of retaining the applicants' DNA was wrong *because* it harmed their privacy interest. Rather,

45 The set of considerations that the principle of proportionality tracks will therefore differ depending on the moral practice in question and the role of the acting agent. Not all action against reason is disproportionate and not all reasons that apply to an acting agent are proportionality-apt. In this sense, proportionality is not a reductive notion. It signals the existence of distinctive moral domains and obligations of role.

46 This is how I think we should read the Court's remark that 'the mere retention and storing of personal data by public authorities, however obtained, are to be regarded as having direct impact on the private-life interest of an individual concerned, irrespective of whether subsequent use is made of the data'.

47 'Reason' here should be understood in its normative, not motivating sense. It is about what normatively counts as a consideration in favor an action not about what were the considerations in the light of which one acted. On this distinction, see Dancy, *Practical Reality* (Oxford University Press, 2002).

it was wrong because it treated them unjustly given their circumstances. Whether or not their privacy interest was in fact harmed was irrelevant. In this respect, Lord Steyn was right to think that the policy of retention did not interfere with the applicants' private life. But just because there has been no harm to one's interests, it doesn't mean that there has been no wrong. For example, I wrong you when I trespass on your land even if I make you no worse off (you didn't mind or you hardly noticed) and even if I make you better off (I watered your plants).48 And vice versa: just because one's interests have been harmed, does not mean that there has been a wrong. You do not wrong me when you open a shop next to mine and drive me out of business, nor when you make my partner fall in love with you.

The preceding remarks cast doubt on the moral merits of the first stage of the orthodox test. Insofar as the first stage is testing for harm (*damnum*) to one's interests, it can lead to error. It can pre-empt the examination of a possible rights violation, either because the applicant's interests in general were not harmed or because the specific interest protected by the relevant Convention right was not harmed.49 It is in my view no surprise that the European Court of Human Rights does not bother any more with the first stage of the orthodox test. If I am right about proportionality that is exactly what it should do. And it is no surprise either that it has been criticized by European scholars for doing so, on the ground that it departs from the orthodox understanding of the test of proportionality.50 To be sure, the European Court still sometimes talks the talk of the orthodoxy. It says for instance, in order to justify examining complaints in accordance with the two-stage orthodox test, that privacy is a wide notion encompassing a number of things: controlling information about one's DNA (*S. and Marper*), search of one's office (*Niemietz*), prohibition from employment (*Sidabras and Dziautas*), dismissal from employment (*Redfearn*), applications for authorization to adopt (*E.B.)*, and many others.51 My argument has been that privacy interests, important as they may be, do not play a constitutive role in justifying the outcome in the cases. Proportionality as the right to equal respect and concern does.

48 Robert Stevens reminds us, drawing on the Romans, that *damnum* is not the same as *injuria*. See his attack on conflating harms and wrongs in Stevens, 'Rights and Other Things', in Andrew Robertson and Donal Nolan (eds.), *Rights and Private Law* (Hart Publishing, 2011).

49 A good example of the second error is the Court of Appeal case of *X v. Y* [2004] EWCA Civ 662. The appellant was an employee working for a charity that promoted the general development of young offenders. While off-duty he was arrested having sex in a public toilet with another man. He admitted the offence and was cautioned. When his employer found out, he dismissed him and the employment tribunal upheld this dismissal as lawful. The appellant raised a complaint under the right to private life of the HRA but the Court of Appeal rejected in on the ground that his actions were not private, having taken place in a public toilet.

50 See the extensive criticism of the Court in Janneke Gerards and Hanneke Senden, 'The Structure of Fundamental Rights and the European Court of Human Rights', *International Journal of Constitutional Law*, 7 (2009): 619–53.

51 For the view that the Court's approach is based on a non-spatial conception of privacy see Virginia Mantouvalou, 'Human Rights and Unfair Dismissal: Private Acts in Public Spaces', *Modern Law Review*, 71 (2008): 912–39; Virginia Mantouvalou, 'Work and Private Life: *Sidabras and Dziautas v Lithuania*', *European Law Review*, 30 (2005): 573–85.

## **VIII. Conclusion**

The language of proportionality figures routinely in non-legal contexts. It has a life outside law, and it can be used to express genuine moral concerns about what various values (for example, democracy or punishment) require. By contrast, the orthodox understanding of proportionality as a human rights doctrine is vacuous. At best, it is a heuristic device that courts use to decide cases that makes little or no normative assumptions about the nature of rights. At worst, it is a rough approximation of what indirect forms of utilitarianism would require. I have argued that the best reconstruction of what courts actually do under the heading of proportionality must begin with normative assumptions about the nature of rights, made at the level of moral theory. At that level, I distinguished between a teleological, interest-based theory of rights and an equality-based, reason-blocking theory of rights. The latter seems to me to capture better the nature of human rights as rights against the state. This is because it links human rights to the responsibility the government has to treat those under its coercive power with equal respect and concern. The responsibility consists in the stringent duty to take into account morally relevant aspects of people's circumstances and to ignore morally irrelevant aspects. Proportionality as the right to equal respect and concern captures the moral rights we have correlative to that stringent duty.

In the second part of the paper, I aimed to show that proportionality, understood as denoting egalitarian rights against one's government, fits and justifies central elements of human rights cases. The European Court of Human Rights finds disproportionate those government policies that are unable to take into account morally *relevant* aspects of people's circumstances (indiscriminate measures), as well as those policies that take into account morally *irrelevant* aspects of their circumstances. I have also argued that proportionality, understood in its moral dimension, has nothing to do with its orthodox doctrinal understanding. Proportionality is neither about means– ends rationality, nor about cost–benefit calculations, nor about balancing moral rights with other moral considerations. Proportionality, properly understood, can be rescued from the vices of the doctrinal orthodoxy if we see it as denoting a subset of normative reasons of political morality, to do with the right to be treated with equal respect and concern by one's government.