---
title: "Human Needs, Human Rights, and Parochialism"
author:
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
booktitle: "Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights"
editor:
  - name: "Rowan Cruft"
  - name: "S. Matthew Liao"
  - name: "Massimo Renzo"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
address: "Oxford, United Kingdom"
year: 2015
pages: "570–587"
citation_key: "renzo2015needs"
---

## <span id="page-584-0"></span> [Human Needs, Human Rights*](#page-8-19)

#### *Massimo Renzo*

### **I. Human Rights: Naturalistic and Political Conceptions**

The language of human rights has become the main currency in which all the most important issues of international justice are normally cashed out. The need to protect human rights is invoked, among other things, to defend the legitimacy of military intervention, to justify the institution of international courts and tribunals, and to assess the eligibility of countries to be part of international agreements or to receive aid they desperately need. The role played by human rights at the domestic level tends to get less attention, but is equally significant. All of the most important human rights are embodied in domestic law, and states bear primary responsibility for their protection and their enforcement. Indeed, according to many, it is precisely the task of protecting and enforcing human rights that ultimately justifies whatever authority states have.1

A notion that plays such a pervasive role both at the domestic and at the international level is in need of justification, and to this task philosophers have turned in recent years. Initially, the obvious move in explaining what human rights are and what justifies their existence has been to look at the natural law tradition, and in particular at the notion of natural rights: rights that all human beings possess simply in virtue of their human nature.2 The crucial element of this "naturalistic" approach, whose root can be found in the thought of Grotius, Pufendorf, and Locke, is the claim that human rights are entitlements that every human being has against every other human being, independently of the existence of institutional arrangements or specific practices.

Although the specific form that human rights will take in different socio-historical contexts might change depending on the institutional background within which they are invoked (which explains why, for example, the human right to education in Ancient Greece takes a different form than the human right to education in Britain today), there is a set of abstractly defined human rights (for example, the human right

<sup>*</sup> I am grateful to Simon Caney, Rowan Cruft, Luara Ferracioli, Simon Hope, Matthew Liao, Saladin Meckled-Garcia, and Matthew Noah-Smith for very helpful comments, Thanks also to audiences at CAPPE, King's College London, Oxford, Warwick and the 2013 *Priority in Practice* conference at UCL for stimulating discussions.

<sup>1</sup> Allen Buchanan, *Justice, Legitimacy, and Self-Determination: Moral Foundations for International Law* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007); Andrew Altman and Christopher Heath Wellman, *A Liberal Theory of International Justice* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011).

<sup>2</sup> Thomas Pogge, *World Poverty and Human Rights: Cosmopolitan Responsibilities and Reforms* (Cambridge; Malden, MA: Polity, 2002), 60–5; John Tasioulas, "On the Nature of Human Rights," in G. Ernst and J.-C. Heilinger (eds.), *The Philosophy of Human Rights: Contemporary Controversies* (Berlin/ Boston: de Gruyter, 2012), 17–59.

to education) that all human beings have independently of their being part of any institution or of their being involved in particular social practices.3

The naturalistic view, however, has been criticized for two reasons: first, the view is said to ignore the political dimension of human rights. In recent years, many have argued that human rights are primarily claims that we have against officials and members of particular institutional structures, in virtue of the fact that we are subject to their authority. These rights do not exist outside of this institutional context. Indeed, their function according to some of the defenders of this view (often referred to as the "political conception of human rights"), is precisely to mark the limits of political authorities by setting the conditions of their internal legitimacy (ie, states' right to impose obligations on their subjects) or external legitimacy (ie, states' right against interference with their sovereignty).4

The second problem with the naturalistic conception of human rights is that it invites the objection that human rights are parochial constructions, insofar as they seem to ultimately rely on controversial metaphysical and moral assumptions about human nature that are not acceptable to non-Western cultures. This worry has accompanied the debate on human rights since its very beginning. The year before the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), a "Statement on Human Rights" was prepared by the American Anthropological Association for the UN Commission on Human Rights, which was drafting the Declaration. One of the questions raised in the Statement was: "How can the proposed Declaration be applicable to all human beings, and not be a statement of rights conceived only in terms of the values prevalent in the countries of Western Europe and America?"5 The problems encountered by naturalistic conceptions in answering this question are one of the reasons why some philosophers have moved toward a political account of human rights.6

The first objection can, I think, be resisted quite easily. It is not clear why naturalistic conceptions would have a problem in acknowledging the important political functions that human rights play as triggers for international intervention or standards of political legitimacy. The question, however, is *why* we should think that human rights perform such a role: Why should we think that those states that violate or fail to fulfil human rights, lose their right to rule, or at least their right against being interfered with by other states? This is something that political conceptions of human rights simply postulate, but that naturalistic conceptions can actually explain. It is because human rights constitute important normative protections we are endowed

3 James Griffin, *On Human Rights* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 149; Carl Wellman, *The Moral Dimensions of Human Rights* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 28; but see Tasioulas, "On the Nature of Human Rights," pp. 31–6, for a criticism of this way to understand the idea that human rights are natural.

4 John Rawls, *The Law of Peoples* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 2002); Charles R. Beitz, *The Idea of Human Rights* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009); Joshua Cohen, *The Arc of the Moral Universe and Other Essays* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010), chs. 9–10; Joseph Raz, "Human Rights without Foundations," in Samantha Besson and John Tasioulas (eds.), *The Philosophy of International Law* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 321–38, and "Human Rights in the Emerging World Order," this volume, ch. 11. I borrow the distinction between "naturalistic" and "political" conceptions of human rights from Beitz.

5 "Statement on Human Rights," *American Anthropologist*, 49 [1947]: 53.

6 Rawls, *The Law of Peoples*, 68.

with independently of our membership in political or social institutions, that they can constrain the way in which political institutions operate in the way indicated by the political conception.7

Whereas other claims of justice can be made only against the backdrop of the existence of particular institutions, human rights constitute claims that we are entitled to insist upon regardless of any institutional membership. These claims are not created by states, but pre-exist them. And it is because they do so that they contribute to establishing the legitimacy of states by specifying the limits within which states can operate if they are to retain their authority.

Naturalistic conceptions however, have their own problems. To begin with, they need to provide a convincing account of the features of human beings that justify the existence of human rights. If they fail to do so, the move toward a political justification seems more compelling. Moreover, naturalistic conceptions should provide an account of the features of human beings that justify human rights while resisting the second objection raised earlier, namely that of being parochial constructions. For one feature of human rights that is taken to be uncontroversial is their universality, and we could not account for this feature if human rights turned out to be tied to a specific moral or cultural point of view.8

The aim of this paper is to outline an account that meets these two desiderata, ie, a naturalistic conception of human rights that is capable of resisting the objection of parochialism. I start by considering James Griffin's attempt to ground human rights in normative agency. I raise two objections against his view and argue that we should abandon it in favour of a needs-based justification of human rights. I then articulate what I call the "basic needs approach" to the justification of human rights, and show how this approach can address the parochialism objection.

## **II. Human Rights and Normative Agency**

One of the strengths of naturalistic approaches is that they are better placed than political approaches to make sense of the link between human rights and human dignity, a link that is explicitly affirmed in many of the most important human rights documents. For example, the preamble of the UDHR refers to the "inherent dignity and. . . equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family" and to the fact that "[a]ll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights." The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) go further and explicitly acknowledge that human rights "*derive* from the inherent dignity of the human person,"9 as does the Vienna Declaration.10

These formulations seem to ground the existence of human rights in human dignity, where the latter is understood as something that belongs to all and only human

<sup>7</sup> I develop this argument in Massimo Renzo, "Human Rights and the Priority of the Moral," *Social Philosophy and Policy*, forthcoming.

<sup>8</sup> Rawls, *The Law of Peoples*, 68. 9 Emphasis added.

<sup>10</sup> The preamble of the Vienna Declaration states that "all human rights derive from the dignity and worth inherent in the human person."

beings in virtue of certain features they possess (their being human or, as the UDHR puts it, their belonging to "the human family"). Moreover, the preamble of the UDHR explicitly acknowledges the existence of pre-existing moral rights that all human beings have, *qua* human beings. The function of the Declaration is to "recognize" these rights and "promote [their] respect."

Historical accounts of the drafting of the UDHR seem to confirm this picture. Johannes Morsink's influential reconstruction, for example, stresses that the drafters took themselves as formulating a list of moral rights possessed by human beings as such, to which legal recognition would have to be given in the future.11 Maritain's famous remark that the drafters could agree on the rights only "on condition no one asks us why" is sometimes quoted in support of the view that human rights cannot be justified by appealing to the sort of moral rights invoked by naturalistic accounts, but this is a mistake. The fact that the drafters decided not to appeal to a particular moral justification of human rights in drafting the Declaration does not mean that they did not think such justification was available and that it was ultimately this justification that validated the list of human rights on which they converged. Maritain himself, while advocating the need to pursue practical agreement on the rights to be included in the declaration, firmly believed that human rights were ultimately grounded in what he considered to be inalienable natural rights.12

The mere appeal to the notion of "human dignity," however, is too vague to do any substantive justificatory work, unless we explain in what sense human rights protect human dignity. Griffin's theory does this by invoking the idea of "personhood" or "normative agency." His argument is straightforward: in order to find out what the distinctive features of humanity are, we need to look at those features that distinguish human life from the life of non-human animals. These features, according to Griffin, have to do with our capacity to form pictures of what a good life is and to pursue the conception of the good life that we have chosen for ourselves. Thus, it is in these terms that we should understand the notion of human dignity. Having human dignity is having the capacity to choose what to do with our life and to successfully pursue the plan of life we have chosen. Human rights protect this capacity, because whatever threatens this capacity threatens the very possibility to live a "human" life.13

The capacity to have a human life for Griffin is thus tied to our capacity to act as autonomous moral agents. In particular, three conditions must be fulfilled for us to qualify as normative agents: first, we must be able to choose what to do with our life; second, we must have sufficient resources available to pursue the path that we have chosen; third, we must not be prevented from pursuing the path we have chosen. The protection afforded to us by human rights serves the function of favouring the fulfilment of these conditions for all human beings.

Griffin's view has been extremely influential and much has been written about each of these components.14 For the purposes of this paper I want to focus on the first one,

<sup>11</sup> Johannes Morsink, *The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Drafting, and Intent* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999).

<sup>12</sup> Jaques Maritain, "On the Philosophy of Human Rights," in *Human Rights, Comments and Interpretations*, ed. UNESCO (New York: A. Wingate, 1949).

<sup>13</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 31–3.

<sup>14</sup> John Tasioulas, "Human Rights, Universality and the Values of Personhood: Retracing Griffin's Steps," *European Journal of Philosophy*, 10(1) (2002): 79–100; John Gardner, "'Simply in Virtue of Being

as it is here that the link between human dignity and the capacity to act as autonomous agents is made. Should we follow Griffin in using this link as a ground for the justification of human rights? One problem with this view is that it has the unappealing implication that children, the severely mentally disabled, and individuals suffering from advanced dementia cannot be said to have human rights. Given that these subjects do not have the capacity for normative agency, they cannot enjoy those rights whose justification consists in protecting normative agency.15

At first sight this might sound like a *reductio* of Griffin's view, but we should be careful not to overstate the force of this objection. Saying that children, the severely mentally disabled or individuals suffering from dementia do not have a human right, say, not to be tortured is not saying that there would be nothing wrong with torturing them. In fact, it's not even to say that they don't have a *moral* right not to be tortured. As Griffin correctly points out, we should resist the temptation to turn every important moral consideration into a consideration of human rights. The capacity of children or the severely mentally disabled to suffer imposes on us a powerful obligation to refrain from torturing them, and possibly also grounds a moral right on their part not to be tortured. Griffin's point is simply that these subjects do not have a *human* right not to be tortured, since a human right not to be tortured, like all human rights, protects our capacity to exercise normative agency, which children and the severely mentally disabled do not possess.16

But even so qualified, Griffin's position seems unpalatable. There certainly is a sense in which the wrong committed when we murder or torture someone capable of rational agency is different from the wrong committed when we torture or murder someone who is not. In the former case we are thwarting the capacity of the victim to set ends for herself and plan how to achieve those ends, whereas in the latter we are not. And yet it seems that when we say that this sort of behaviour is incompatible with the respect that we owe the victim *qua* human being, we are not referring to this. When we say that murdering or torturing someone is incompatible with the respect that we owe the victim *qua* human being we are referring to a sort of disrespect that does not depend on whether our conduct will thwart her capacity to act as a normative agent. The sort of disrespect for our common humanity that we are invoking when we blame the torturer is the same, whether his victim is a fully rational agent, a child or someone in the advanced stage of senile dementia. If we think that this reaction is appropriate, we should reject Griffin's view, despite its ability to accommodate the thought that we are under an obligation not to torture or murder children or the severely mentally disabled. For this is not enough to bring his view in line with our considered judgment about who the bearers of human rights are.

Notice that this objection does not challenge Griffin's view only at its margins. The problem is not whether and how his view can accommodate some non-central cases. The objection goes right to the heart of Griffin's account, in that it challenges the claim

Human': The Whos and Whys of Human Rights," *Journal of Ethics and Social Philosophy*, 2 (2008): 1–22; Roger Crisp (ed.), *Griffin On Human Rights*, forthcoming. See also the "Symposium on James Griffin's *On Human Rights*," *Ethics*, 120 (2010), with papers by John Tasioulas, Allen Buchanan, and Rainer Forst, and a response by Griffin.

<sup>15</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, ch. 4.

<sup>16</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 85. I should make clear that Griffin does not commit to the claim that children or the severely mentally disabled have moral rights. I am simply noticing that his argument leaves this option available to him.

that normative agency is the right notion to invoke in order to explain what it is to have human dignity. If we think that the relevant sense in which someone's humanity is disrespected when she is tortured, murdered or raped is the same in the case of children or the mentally disabled as well as in the case of rational agents, we have reasons to look for a different conception of humanity on which to ground the notion of human rights. Particularly so if, like Griffin, we believe that in constructing an adequate account of human rights we need to aim not only at correctness but also at achieving a substantive and durable agreement. Griffin plausibly introduces this condition as necessary in order to produce a theory of human rights that will have a "fighting chance" to be adopted and make a practical difference.17 A theory that excludes children, the mentally disabled, and people affected by senile dementia from the class of human rights bearer does not seem to have such a chance.

More generally, the objection here is that Griffin's view fails to account for the widely shared idea that human rights are universal, in the sense that they are possessed by all *human beings*.18 What his view vindicates is rather the different claim that human rights are possessed only by a subset of the group of human beings: the group of *persons* (or rational agents). To the extent that universality is an important feature of an adequate account of human rights, we should resist theories that fail to account for it.

In the next section I suggest that a better candidate for grounding our conception of humanity is the notion of human needs. Before I do that however, let me introduce a second problem for Griffin's view, namely the difficulties it encounters in resisting the objection of parochialism. Grounding the notion of humanity in the capacity to act as autonomous agents makes Griffin's theory particularly appealing to members of liberal societies, whose social and political structures are largely organized around the importance of this value, but inevitably exposes the theory to the objection of being founded on a particular conception of the good, one that members of non-liberal societies could reasonably reject. If so, it looks as if human rights cannot be defended as universal moral standards and can be criticized as the expression of a particular set of values and impugned as a manifestation of a form of "Western cultural imperialism."

Griffin's main reply to this objection seems to be that any morality that does not acknowledge the importance of moral autonomy should be rejected, since "[a]nyone who thinks seriously about the value of our status as normative agents. . .will recognize that. . .[it is] highly important."19 But even if we were to grant this, his view would still be problematic insofar as it commits us to the conclusion that those who lead their lives according to non-liberal moralities do not have a properly *human* life. This is because to the extent that these individuals follow moralities that are structured around the authority of tradition or the value of certain forms of community, rather than around the importance of moral autonomy, they fail to have the sort of agency that, according to Griffin, is necessary to have a properly human life. But

<sup>17</sup> James Griffin, "Human Rights: Questions of Aim and Approach," *Ethics*, 120 (2010): 746, 749–50.

<sup>18</sup> At least all human beings living within the same historical context (Raz, "Human Rights in the Emerging World Order," this volume, ch. 11).

<sup>19</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 133.

this view seems implausible. Even if we think that there are reasons to reject these moralities, surely saying that those who fail to do so lack a properly human life goes too far.20

#### **III. Human Needs, Human Rights**

Human rights are particularly strong normative protections. In fact, they are probably the strongest normative protections afforded within our current moral and political frameworks. Although they are not absolute (we can imagine situations in which competing normative concerns are sufficiently weighty to justify their violation), human rights are nonetheless so strong that they can be overridden only by particularly weighty considerations. This is why a plausible naturalistic account of human rights will have to ground them in especially important human interests.

Our interest in acting as autonomous agents might at first seem like a plausible candidate, but should ultimately be rejected because autonomy-based theories of human rights fail to meet the two desiderata identified earlier, ie, providing a convincing account of the features of human beings that justify human rights, while resisting the parochialism objection. Autonomy-based theories fail to meet the first desideratum because our considered judgment does not seem to tie the possession of human rights to the capacity to act as autonomous agents. They fail to meet the second because the value of autonomy depends on the adoption of a conception of the good that can be reasonably rejected by non-liberal moralities.21

An adequate theory of human rights will thus have to provide a more inclusive account, one capable of accommodating our considered judgment that children, the severely mentally disabled, and individuals suffering from advanced dementia also possess human rights, while at the same time relying on some feature of humanity whose value cannot be reasonably rejected by non-liberal moralities. The best candidate, I will suggest, is the idea of human needs.22

20 A second argument Griffin offers against the parochialism objection is based on the idea that prudential judgments about human welfare presuppose the existence of a shared conceptual scheme that ultimately must rely on a list of shared values (Griffin, *On Human Rights*, chs. 6–7). Whilst more sophisticated than the argument I discuss in the text, this argument is also unconvincing. However, I will not be able to address it here for reasons of space. For a sympathetic, although ultimately critical, discussion, see Simon Hope, "Common Humanity as a Justification for Human Rights Claims," in Gerhard Ernst and Jan-Christoph Heilinger (eds.), *The Philosophy of Human Rights Contemporary Controversies* (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2012), 219–24.

21 Although I have focused here on Griffin's account, similar objections can be raised against other autonomy-based theories of human rights, such as the one defended by Alan Gewirth, *Human Rights: Essays on Justification and Applications* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982).

22 The idea that human rights can be grounded in human needs is defended by David Miller (*National Responsibility and Global Justice* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), ch. 7; "Grounding Human Rights," *Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy*, 15 (2012): 407–27) and Thomas Pogge (*World Poverty and Human Rights*.). The view overlaps to some extent with the capabilities approach defended by Martha Nussbaum (*Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000); *Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach* (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011) and Amartya Sen ("Elements of a Theory of Human Rights," *Philosophy & Public Affairs*, 32 (2004): 315–56).

At first sight, the idea of needs might seem like a bad candidate for grounding human rights. After all, the needs we have typically depend on certain aims or goals that we have adopted. If I want to drive a car, I need to get a licence. If I want to be a tennis player, I need to learn how to play a backhand. Those who don't want to drive a car don't need to get a licence. Those who don't want to be a tennis players don't need to learn how to play a backhand. However, there seems to be a class of needs that we have simply *qua* human beings, independently of specific goals that we have adopted for ourselves. In order to function as human beings we need things like food, air, water, shelter, a minimum level of health, and a minimal level of social interaction. When we are deprived of the opportunity to fulfil these needs to a significant extent, our capacity to lead a minimally decent human life is compromised. Call these *basic human needs*. It is on this notion that a plausible justification of human rights can be founded.

Using the idea of basic human needs, rather than autonomy, as the ground for the justification of human rights has the obvious advantage of accounting for the fact that children, the severely mentally disabled, and individuals suffering from advanced dementia have human rights. For while the individuals falling into these three classes do not have the capacity for normative agency, they certainly have basic human needs. However, the basic needs account incurs a number of other objections. In this section, I consider two objections raised by Griffin; in the next one, I raise and address two further problems; in section V, I show how the basic needs account can address the parochialism objection.

Griffin briefly considers the possibility of grounding human rights in something like basic needs but rejects it because the idea of a "normal functioning" seems to him too narrow to provide an account of human rights. For in what way am I malfunctioning if, say, I am denied freedom of religion? As Griffin puts it,

[t]hat puts the malfunction in the wrong place. What is functioning badly is my society. The idea of health, mental and physical, may be central to a useful notion of basic needs, but it is the wrong place to be looking for an explanation of human rights. It is too narrow.23

Griffin is certainly right in saying that a society that denies freedom of religion to some of its members would be malfunctioning, but why would it be implausible to also claim that those who are denied freedom of religion cannot have the sort of spiritual life and social recognition that play a fundamental role in a minimally decent human life? One problem with Griffin's objection is that the idea of a minimally decent human life is reduced by him to the idea of a healthy biological and psychological life. This however, is an unduly restrictive way of understanding the notion of human life. The way in which the notion is understood within the basic needs account is richer, as it encompasses a number of social needs that must be met in order to have a minimally decent life: at the very least, needs for a minimum degree of social interaction and for a minimum level of recognition. In fact, it is arguably the presence of these needs which have a social dimension that marks the difference between a properly human life and a

23 Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 89.

sub-human, or animal one, where the latter is conceived as aiming primarily at fulfilling a number of physiological needs.24 And once we pay attention to the importance of these social needs, the idea that freedom of religion, or something like it, must be guaranteed in order to have a minimally decent life does not seems problematic at all.

A second objection raised by Griffin to the basic needs account is that if human rights were grounded in the need to avoid ailment and malfunctioning then they would be implausibly lavish, as we could invoke them to claim protection against any form of ailment or malfunctioning, no matter how slight. "But nearly everyone accepts that, on the contrary, there comes a point where aliments and malfunctions become minor enough that they do not create by right, a demand upon others to remedy them."25 This, however, is a thought that the basic needs account can easily accommodate. Malfunctions that are minor enough not to impair our capacity to live a minimally decent life (Griffin's example are colds and minor psychological hangups) do not ground human rights because they fall outside the scope of the notion of *basic* needs, ie, needs that must be met in order to lead a minimally decent human life.

It is important here to distinguish between using the notion of needs as the foundation of a theory of human rights and using it as the foundation of a broader theory of morality (or perhaps political morality). Griffin intends to reject the former, but ends up discussing the latter instead. This is confirmed by the fact that he concludes his argument by claiming that "if a society were well off and a cold or. . .minor hangups would be cured by a cheap pill, then the National Health Service ought to provide it. It is hard to find in the need account resources to draw the line we want here."26 This is a problem that defenders of needs-based account of morality acknowledge. David Braybrooke, for example, admits that medical demands constitute a "breakdown in the concept of needs" because there is no way out of acknowledging that nothing already present in the concept of needs saves the need for medical care from becoming a "bottomless pit."27 But while grounding morality on the moral imperative to meet needs does indeed raise the problem of why we should stop short of meeting trivial medical needs such as those discussed by Griffin, a theory of human rights that focuses on the basic needs that must be met in order to have a minimally decent life does not have the same problem.

Although some discussion is required as to where to draw the line, it seems obvious enough that the sort of medical issues brought up by Griffin do not compromise our capacity to have a minimally decent life as human beings. This means that even if a society were well-off and could provide anti-colds and anti-minor-hang-ups pills for everyone, this should not be addressed as a matter of human rights. This is not to say that the society in question should not provide the pills, if this could be done at a reasonable cost. Perhaps it should. But this moral requirement, if it exists, would fall

- 24 For further elaboration of this point, see section V. 25 Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 89.
<sup>26</sup> Griffin, *On Human Rights*, 89.

<sup>27</sup> David Braybrooke, *Meeting Needs* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987), 299, 301. Needsbased moral theories are also defended by David Wiggins, Garrett Thomson, and Gillian Brock; see David Wiggins, *Needs, Values, Truth: Essays in the Philosophy of Value* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987); Garrett Thomson, *Needs* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987); Gillian Brock, "Morally Important Needs," *Philosophia*, 26 (1998): 165–78.

outside the scope of the basic needs justification of human rights, insofar as it would be grounded on needs that are not basic. Needs that are not basic do not contribute to the justification of human rights, because meeting those needs is not necessary in order to have a minimally decent human life. We can have a life of dignity, of the sort required by the basic needs account, even if those needs are not met.28

## **IV. The Idea of a "Minimally Decent Human Life"**

In the previous section I introduced the idea of basic human needs, ie, needs that must be met in order to have a minimally decent life, and I suggested that human rights are grounded in our interest in having these basic needs met. The aim of this section is to further refine this idea. To begin with, it's worth stressing that a minimally decent life is something less than a minimally happy or flourishing life. A flourishing life is one in which I develop and exercise the capacities that are important to me. But, the capacities that are important to me and make my life flourish are different from those that are important to you and make your life flourish (unless we operate with an implausibly restrictive conception of the good life, whereby there is only one set of valuable choices that equally applies to everyone). The idea of a minimally decent life, by contrast, is the same for everyone, because it includes the pre-conditions that need to be secured in order to achieve whatever further goals we intend to pursue in light of our own conception of the good.29

While we all have different needs to the extent that we have different goals and pursue different conceptions of the good, basic needs are the same for everyone because they do not depend on what we require in order to pursue specific goals or conceptions of the good. They only depend on what it takes to live a minimally decent human life—a life that needs to be secured independently of what our specific plans and goals are. In this sense the notion of basic needs seems particularly well-suited to ground an account of human rights, as the point of human rights, as many have noticed, is to set minimum standards: "the lower limits on tolerable human conduct," rather than "great aspirations and exalted ideals."30

At the same time, grounding human rights in the conditions for a minimally decent human life seems to create a number of problems. The first is that we normally think

28 Notice that while the basic needs account relies on the idea that respecting human dignity requires guaranteeing the conditions for a minimally decent life, I haven't said anything here about how the notion of human dignity is to be understood. In this paper I want to be as ecumenical as possible about this. The basic needs account does not depend for its validity on the adoption of a specific account of human dignity, and can be combined with several different accounts. (See, eg, Michael Rosen, *Dignity: Its History and Meaning* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012); Christopher McCrudden (ed.), *Understanding Human Dignity* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013); Jeremy Waldron, "Is Dignity the Foundation of Human Rights?," this volume, ch. 5.) Of course, depending on how we understand human dignity, we will have different answers to the question of why guaranteeing the conditions for a minimally decent life is necessary to respect human dignity.

29 Miller, *National Responsibility and Global Justice*, 181. A similar line is pursued by the primary goods account defended by S. Matthew Liao, "Human Rights as Fundamental Conditions for a Good Life," this volume, ch. 3).

30 Henry Shue, *Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and U.S. Foreign Policy* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), xi.

that we can choose not to have some of these needs fulfilled, without thereby failing to have a minimally decent human life. For example, if I choose not to eat or not to move freely as part of a political protest or as part of a religious practice, we would not say that my life is not minimally decent. It is only when I am forcibly prevented from having those needs met that we would say that. This suggests that what is required in order to have a minimally decent life is not that the needs are in fact met, but that we have the opportunity to meet them. Thus, human rights protect the conditions for a minimally decent life by providing us with the opportunity to have our basic needs met. It is the lack of such opportunity that would prevent us from having a minimally decent life.31

The second problem is more serious. We might challenge the basic needs approach, even once reformulated as protecting the opportunity to have our needs met, along the following lines. Consider the case of someone who has been tortured or raped. Should we say that this person's life is not minimally decent, not a *human* life, since her human rights have been violated? This would be implausible. Certainly it is possible for victims of rape or torture to have a minimally decent life, a properly human life, despite the wrongful harm they have suffered. But if so, it looks as if we'll have to give up the gist of the basic needs account. For if the life of someone whose human rights have been violated can be minimally decent, then it is not true that the point of human rights is to secure the conditions for a minimally decent life in the sense that we cannot have a minimally decent life unless we have the opportunity to have our basic needs met. Victims of torture or rape were deprived of this opportunity (as opposed to monks or protesters, who voluntarily choose to deprive themselves of the opportunity to have certain basic needs met), and yet we want to say that their life can be minimally decent. 32

This seems to me the most important challenge for any naturalistic account that grounds human rights in the conditions necessary for a "minimally decent human life." If we want this idea to be more than a mere piece of rhetoric, we need to explain how it is possible to say that human rights protect the conditions necessary for a minimally decent human life, without having to accept at the same time the view that whoever has been the victim of torture or rape (or any other human rights violation) cannot be said to have a minimally decent human life.

We might think that one way to answer this question is to bite the bullet and argue that once we consider the lasting damaging effects produced by human rights violations such as torture and rape, the view that the victims of these violations do not have a minimally decent life is not so implausible after all. Jim Nickel, for example, argues that rape is degrading because "it treats a person as a mere sexual resource to be used without consent, or because in many cultures it destroys one's social standing as a virtuous and pure person," and that "degradation may deprive a person of the respect of

<sup>31</sup> This distinction is particularly important within the capability approach. See Amartya Sen's discussion of the distinction between fasting and starving in his *Development as Freedom* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 76, and Nussbaum, *Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach*, 25. See also Miller, "Grounding Human Rights," 414.

<sup>32</sup> For a helpful discussion of this problem, see Rowan Cruft, "From a Good Life to Human Rights: Some Complications," this volume, ch. 4.

#### *Massimo Renzo* 581

self and others."33 However, this won't do. Not because similar effects are never produced, but because (fortunately) they are not always produced. Only in a limited number of cases would we consider saying that the damaging effects of rape or torture are such that the life of the victim is not minimally decent. Typically these effects will be produced only when some important human right is repeatedly violated, or when its violation takes place in the context of a large number of other human rights violations suffered by the victim.

A better answer is, I think, this: the point is not that someone who has been tortured or raped cannot have a minimally decent life. The point is that a life in which we don't have strong normative protections against human rights violations such as torture or rape is not a minimally decent one. All that the basic needs account must show in order to conclude that we have a human right not to be tortured is that if we did not have such a right, we would not be able to have a minimally decent life. The basic needs account is not required to show that our human right not to be tortured can be derived from the fact that if we are tortured, our life is not minimally decent. In fact, the basic needs account is not committed to this further claim.

Although this answer is an improvement over the one offered by Nickel, it is insufficient, I think, to rescue the basic needs account. For it is not clear that a life in which we lacked human rights against being tortured would fail to be minimally decent, given that others would still have a duty not to torture us. The main difference between a world in which we have a right not to be tortured and a world in which there is an obligation not to torture, but this obligation lacks a correlative right, is this: in the second world, although torturers would be acting wrongly, their victims would not be wronged by their actions.34 This difference is certainly significant, but it is not clear that someone's life would fail to be minimally decent in the second world, if it is minimally decent in the first one (assuming that the two worlds are similar in all other respects).

The basic needs view here shows its limits if understood as an instrumental account of human rights. The view, as I have presented it so far, is instrumental because it starts by identifying a valuable state of affairs, ie, having a minimally decent life, and then ascribes human rights to individuals insofar as doing so is necessary to realize, or at least significantly contributes to the realization of, such a state of affairs.35 But once it becomes clear that our capacity to have a minimally decent life is not significantly affected by the fact that we lack rights that protect the opportunity to meet basic needs, the claim that human rights can be justified by appealing to the importance of protecting such opportunity seems less plausible. If the justification of human rights rests on their capacity to protect the conditions for a minimally decent life, and if we can have a minimally decent life despite the fact that we lack rights that protect the opportunity to have our basic needs met, appealing to the importance of meeting such needs (or of having the opportunity to meet these needs) cannot provide a justification for human rights.

<sup>33</sup> James W. Nickel, *Making Sense of Human Rights* (Malden, MA; Oxford: Blackwell, 2007), 65.

<sup>34</sup> Joel Feinberg, "The Nature and Value of Rights," *The Journal of Value Inquiry*, 4 (1970): 247.

<sup>35</sup> This is how the view is understood by prominent defenders such as David Miller and Thomas Pogge. Views that are in the vicinity of the need based one (those that grounds human rights on capabilities or primary goods) are also typically presented as instrumental accounts of human rights.

However, I don't think that the basic needs view should be constructed exclusively in instrumental terms. In addition to being instrumentally valuable, human rights also have non-instrumental value, and this non-instrumental value contributes to their justification. What does it mean to claim that human rights have non-instrumental value? The idea is that these rights express the worth that human beings have as ends in themselves. Instead of deriving their value from their capacity to realize some fundamental interests we have, human rights express our nature as beings of a certain sort: beings "whose interests are worth protecting. [These rights] express the *worth of the person* rather than the *worth of what is in the interests of that person*."36

According to the non-instrumental approach, human rights should not be ascribed to individuals only insofar as they are necessary to realize the more fundamental valuable state of affairs of having a minimally decent life. Rather, human rights "express a particular conception of the kind of place that should be occupied by individuals in a moral system—how their lives, actions, and interests should be recognized by the system of justification and authorization that constitute morality . . .They embody a form of recognition of the value of each individual."37 Thus, when human rights are violated, according to the non-instrumental approach the problem is not that the conditions for a minimally decent life will be compromised to such an extent that the victim cannot be said to have a properly human life. Rather, the problem is primarily that with their conduct, those who violate human rights fail to acknowledge the status that human beings possess simply in virtue of their being human.

Jean Hampton has suggested that there are actions that "morally injure" their victim, in the sense that the victim is treated in a way which is precluded by her value.38 These actions represent the value of the victim as less than the value that she possesses, as they deny the entitlements which are generated by that value. This is what violations of human rights do (in addition to whatever harm they cause): they deny that the victim has the status of human being, in that they treat the victim as if she did not have those basic protections that all human beings possess simply in virtue of their being human.39 In doing so, they fail to acknowledge the dignity of the victim.

Here it might be objected that to the extent that human rights are justified in non-instrumental terms, the basic needs account I have offered is redundant. If human rights are justified as the expression of the intrinsic value that human beings possess, it looks as if any appeal to needs can be dispensed with at the level of justification. This however, would be a mistake. To begin with, adopting a non-instrumental account of human rights is perfectly compatible with also adopting an instrumental account.

36 F.M. Kamm, *Intricate Ethics: Rights, Responsibilities, and Permissible Harm* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 271.

37 Thomas Nagel, "Personal Rights and Public Space," in *Concealment and Exposure: And Other Essays* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 33–4. In addition to Kamm and Nagel, non-instrumental accounts of human rights are also defended by Warren Quinn, "Actions, Intentions and Consequences: The Doctrine of Doing and Allowing," in *Morality and Action* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 149–74, and Rowan Cruft, "On the Non-Instrumental Value of Basic Rights," *Journal of Moral Philosophy*, 7 (2010): 441–61.

38 Jean Hampton, *The Intrinsic Worth of Persons: Contractarianism in Moral and Political Philosophy*, ed. Daniel Farnham (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007).

39 I originally suggested this view in Massimo Renzo, "Crimes Against Humanity and the Limits of International Criminal Law," *Law and Philosophy*, 31(4) (2012): 443–76.

Indeed, a plausible justification of human rights is likely to be one that acknowledges the important role that both justifications play.

We have seen that there will be cases in which it is possible for someone to have a minimally decent human life despite the fact that some of her human rights have been violated. But if too many human rights are violated, or if some important human rights are violated too often, the idea that the life of the victim will fall below the threshold of what we would consider a minimally decent life becomes more plausible. This is the contribution that the instrumental reading of the basic needs account makes to the justification of human rights.

However, the notion of basic needs also figures within the non-instrumental account of human rights I intend to defend. For basic needs are precisely what identify the sort of protections that if disrespected, produce the relevant type of moral injury to our status as human beings described by Kamm and Nagel. It is by failing to acknowledge that individuals have strong normative protections that guarantee their option of having basic needs met, that we fall short of treating them with the respect owed to them *qua* human beings. Thus, far from being in tension with each other, the instrumental and the non-instrumental accounts of basic needs can work in tandem to provide what seems to me the most promising justification of human rights.40

More needs to be said, of course, to develop the basic needs account. For reasons of space, this task will have to wait. In the next section I will assess whether the account has the resources to address the parochialism objection. As we have seen, the incapacity of naturalistic approaches to provide a convincing answer to this objection is one of the main reasons that has motivated some philosophers to adopt a political account of human rights. Thus, it is important to show whether and how the basic needs account can deal with it.

## **V. Human Rights and Parochialism**

In assessing the capacity of the basic needs account to address the parochialism objection, we can start by noticing that the account is better equipped to do so than other formulations of the naturalistic conception, such as Griffin's. While theories that ground human rights in distinctively liberal values such as autonomy or liberty can be more easily criticized as manifestations of "Western cultural imperialism," it's hard to see how the same objection could be moved against a theory that appeals to the notion of basic needs. For basic needs do not depend on a specific conception of the good, but rather on what it takes to function as human beings, whichever conception of the good we hold. Even if we grant that different conceptions of the good are authoritative in

<sup>40</sup> Leif Wenar and Rowan Cruft also argue that instrumental and non-instrumental justifications of rights can co-exist, although they offer different accounts of how the two justifications can be reconciled (Leif Wenar, "The Value of Rights," in Joseph K. Campbell, Michael O'Rourke, and David Shier (eds.), *Law and Social Justice* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 179–209; Cruft, "On the Non-Instrumental Value of Basic Rights"). Nagel also seems open to the idea (Nagel, "Personal Rights and Public Space," 34, 42), although his arguments mainly seem to support the non-instrumental justification. For a powerful defense of the idea that we should adopt a pluralistic approach to the justification of human rights, see John Tasioulas' contribution to this volume. Tasioulas also acknowledges that an adequate justification for human rights should encompass both instrumental and non-instrumental considerations (though he avoids these labels).

different cultural contexts, this cannot weaken the claim that basic human needs will have to be protected, as the very possibility of pursuing a conception of the good, be it a liberal or a non-liberal one, requires that basic needs be met.

Of course this is not to say that there can be no disagreement about basic needs, or about how the relationship between basic needs and human rights should be conceived. Three sources of disagreement, in particular, should be considered. First, different basic needs will take different forms in different social contexts, because although the point of basic needs considerations is to guarantee a minimally decent human life, there is some margin for reasonable disagreement about what counts as a minimally decent human life, as well as about the best way to guarantee it. Different cultures will have different views as to what the best way to meet basic needs is and as to when these needs can be said to be met. (Consider for example how different cultures will look at the question of how to meet the need for a minimal level of social interaction.)41 Second, different cultures will disagree about *why* meeting basic needs is morally mandatory, thereby disagreeing about the moral reasons that ultimately justify human rights. This might be worrisome because having different views about which moral considerations ultimately justify human rights might be thought to lead to significant disagreement as to which human rights we have, as well as to what their limits are and who can be said to have them. Third, members of different cultures might disagree about the relative urgency of different needs, thereby reaching different conclusions about the relative importance of different human rights and about how trade-offs between them should be conducted.

These three sources of disagreement are certainly important, but I will argue that they do not pose significant problems for a theory of human rights founded on basic needs. I consider them in turn. The idea that the same basic needs will be conceived in relatively different ways in light of different social contexts should come as no surprise. After all, we have already seen that basic human needs consist not only of biological or material needs, but also of social needs (such as the need for a minimum degree of social interaction and for a minimum level of recognition).42 There is a deeper point to be made here however, namely that all of our basic needs, including those connected to purely material functions (such as eating or drinking), are inevitably embedded in a particular social context which specifies the way in which they are to be fulfilled in order to be fully met.

Marx saw this when he wrote that "eating, drinking, procreating, etc., are . . . genuinely human functions. But taken abstractly, separated from the sphere of all other human activity and turned into sole and ultimate ends, they are animal functions."43 Thus, the point here is not only that human needs include social needs in addition to material needs that are shared by non-human subjects. The point is also that human needs necessarily have a social dimension, even when they are primarily connected to biological functioning.44 It is only to be expected that this social dimension will

- 44 Nussbaum is particularly sensitive to this dimension of the problem. See, eg, *Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
<sup>41</sup> See Miller's distinction between "basic needs" and "societal needs," *National Responsibility and Global Justice*, 182–3.

<sup>42</sup> See earlier, section III.

<sup>43</sup> Karl Marx, "'Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844,' " in Jon Elster (ed.), *Karl Marx: A Reader* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 40.

#### *Massimo Renzo* 585

significantly vary across different cultures and that, because of this, different societies will be organized in very different, and sometimes conflicting, ways. Nonetheless, there seems to be a number of common elements that can be found in each of them.

Human societies are typically structured around small social units, often founded on something like the notion of the family; they provide for some form of education and upbringing of children; they have rules about how access to resources should be regulated and about when resort to violence and coercion is justified. This claim is a descriptive claim as much as a normative one. Not only are we likely to find the presence of these elements, or closely related ones, in all societies that have ever existed. But a society that failed to include one of these core elements is one that would challenge the very notion of a *human* society.

The second source of disagreement might seem more worrisome. Disagreeing about why meeting basic needs is morally mandatory is ultimately disagreeing about the underlying moral considerations to be invoked in justifying human rights, and we might worry that this is likely to lead to disagreement about what these rights are and about what they require. In fact, the opposite is true. One of the reasons why human rights are so valuable is precisely that they enable us to address important practical concerns without having to resort to questions of ultimate value about which people holding different conceptions of the good will inevitably disagree, *including* the question of why we should meet the basic needs upon which the justification of human rights rests.

You might believe, for example, that human dignity should be protected because we have been made in the image of God, whereas I might have a secular understanding of its value. The point of invoking the language of human rights is to bypass our disagreement about this more fundamental issue and converge on the claims that human dignity must be protected by guaranteeing the conditions for a minimally decent life and that this requires fulfilling a set of basic human needs. As long as we do that, there is much we can agree upon in relation to what these rights are and what they require.

This is not a special feature of human rights, but a feature of all moral rights. As Joseph Raz puts it,

[a]ssertions of rights are typically intermediate conclusions in arguments from ultimate values to duties. . . Such intermediate conclusions are used and referred to as if they are themselves complete reasons. The fact that practical arguments proceed through the mediation of intermediate stages so that not every time a practical question arises does one refer to ultimate values for an answer is. . .of crucial importance in making social life possible, not only because it saves time and tediousness, but primarily because it enables a common culture to be formed round shared intermediate conclusions, in spite of a great degree of haziness and disagreement concerning ultimate values.45

I now turn to what seems to me the most serious source of disagreement, namely, the one about the urgency of different human needs. This source of disagreement is particularly worrisome because disagreeing about the urgency of different needs is

45 Joseph Raz, *The Morality of Freedom* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), 181.

likely to lead to different ways of assessing the relative importance of specific human rights, which might be considered a problem to the extent that different cultures will then be likely to disagree about how to trade-off between particular human rights.

After all, the conflicts produced by disagreement about human rights are not typically determined by the fact that certain cultures believe that there is a human right to X while others don't, but rather by disagreement as to how important the human right to X is in comparison to other human rights—for example, how important the right to physical integrity is in comparison to religious or cultural rights (the debate on female genital mutilation is an obvious example). If so, it looks as if a theory of human rights will not be able to neutralize the parochialism objection by pointing at the existence of certain basic needs that must be met in all societies, because the problem of having to mediate between different conceptions of the good will be replicated when it comes to assessing the way in which different cultures value different needs.

Two points should be made in addressing this worry. One is that the relationship between human rights and the fundamental interests protected by them is not a one-to-one relationship, but rather a relationship between a set of fundamental human needs that ought to be protected and a set of fundamental human rights that protects them. Some human rights may directly map onto specific human needs, but normally particular needs will support a range of different rights (for example, the need for physical integrity will support rights such as the right to life and security, the right against torture and cruel punishment, and the right to an adequate standard for health and well-being). At the same time, a given human right might be grounded in a number of different human needs (for example, our right to freedom of conscience will be grounded, among other things, in our need for psychological health and our need for social interaction).46 This means that disagreeing about the urgency of certain needs will not immediately lead to disagreeing about the importance the rights protecting those needs. Since the same human right will be grounded in a plurality of basic needs, different cultures are likely not to disagree about its importance as long as they converge on the urgency of a sufficient number of needs protected by that right, although not all of them.

The second point I intend to make is more general. In dealing with the question of how conflicts between the demands imposed by different cultures should be handled, it's important that we get clearer about what we should expect from a theory of human rights. The point of invoking the language of human rights cannot be to completely eliminate such conflicts. If that was the case, we should indeed conclude that the language of human rights ultimately does constitute a form of "moral imperialism." The point of invoking the language of human rights is rather to make sure that certain minimum standards are guaranteed, while respecting as much as possible the particular cultural and moral values adopted in different political and legal contexts.

<sup>46</sup> For an excellent analysis of this point and it implications for the question of how to deal with conflicts of human rights, see Miller, "Grounding Human Rights," 416–19. See also Allen Buchanan's discussion of the "mirroring view" in his contribution to this volume, ch. 13 ("Why *International Legal* Human Rights?").

#### *Massimo Renzo* 587

This is why whereas general international law obligations are normally implemented uniformly across these different contexts, international human rights law obligations are not. The European Court of Human Rights, for example, recognizes the existence of a "margin of appreciation," which gives local authorities some leeway in determining how international human rights law should be implemented domestically. The main justification for this provision is precisely that when it comes to controversial issues such as sexual ethics, bioethics or the place of religion in society, local cultural and moral values should be allowed to play some role in determining how human rights are to be understood and enforced.

Thus, we should not be worried too much by the fact that the basic needs account cannot completely neutralize cultural divergences concerning how human rights should be interpreted and about their relative weight. The important thing is that there is a substantive agreement about the heart of the matter: the existence of norms that protect our status as human beings by imposing powerful obligations whose function is to provide us with the opportunity to fulfil certain needs we have simply *qua* human beings. In other words, instead of conceiving human rights as something to which different cultures and societies should somehow adapt, we should conceive them as providing us with a common ground within which disagreements and conflicts between societies about how basic needs should be met can be addressed. So understood, far from being a manifestation of moral imperialism, human rights become a powerful tool to constrain moral imperialism. They ensure that interference with a particular society's autonomy is justified *only* when the protection of basic needs is at stake; and that even in this case, interference should be sensitive to the way in which these needs are understood in the society in question.

#### **VI. Conclusion**

A minimally decent life is one in which we have the option to fulfil a core group of socially embedded biological and psychological needs, as well as social needs. I have suggested that this notion can be used to provide a convincing justification for human rights. Human rights protect the conditions for a minimally decent life by providing us with the opportunity to meet such needs and by expressing the value we have *qua* human beings.

The basic needs account is to be preferred to the most prominent alternative naturalistic account of human rights, namely Griffin's autonomy-based view, for two reasons. First, it accommodates our considered judgment that children, the severely mentally disabled, and individuals suffering from advanced dementia possess human rights; second, it has the resources to address the parochialism objection. Obviously, more work is required to develop this account. The aim of this paper was simply to show that it is a promising framework within which to think about the justification of human rights.