---
layout: incollection
date: 2023-01-01
title: Dignity
description: ""
author: Debes, Remy
year: 2023-01-01
category1: reference
category2: "분야"
category3: "성격"
category4: original
related:
  - 요약: ./summary/2023-01-01-sep-dignity-summary.md
  - 번역: ./translation/2023-01-01-sep-dignity-translation.md
permalink: original/sep-dignity/
published: false
toc: true
tags:
  - Markdown
  - Documentation
citation key: sep-dignity
chicago_citation: "Debes, Remy. "Dignity." In *The {Stanford} encyclopedia of philosophy*, edited by Zalta, Edward N. and Nodelman, Uri, . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2023."
---

# Debes, Remy, Dignity (original)  

Debes, Remy. "Dignity." In *The {Stanford} encyclopedia of philosophy*, edited by Zalta, Edward N. and Nodelman, Uri, . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2023.

> 요약: [[./summary/2023-01-01-sep-dignity-summary.md]]  
> 번역: [[./translation/2023-01-01-sep-dignity-translation.md]]  

# [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)

*First published Sat Feb 18, 2023*

[Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is a complex [concept](dictionary.md#concept). In academic and [legal](dictionary.md#legal) contexts, it is typically [used](dictionary.md#use) in the couplet “[human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)” to denote a [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) basic [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status) that purportedly belongs to all [persons](dictionary.md#person) equally, and which [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) [fundamental](dictionary.md#fundamental) [moral](dictionary.md#moral) or political [duties](dictionary.md#duty) or [rights](dictionary.md#right). In this [sense](dictionary.md#sense), many [believe](dictionary.md#believe) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is a defining [ideal](dictionary.md#ideal) of the [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) world, especially in western society. However, the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has long been associated with many more [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning), some of which cut in distinctly different directions: [rank](dictionary.md#rank), station, [honor](dictionary.md#honor), uniqueness, [beauty](dictionary.md#beauty), poise, gravitas, integrity, self-respect, [self-esteem](dictionary.md#self-esteem), a sacred place in the [order](dictionary.md#order) of things, supreme [worth](dictionary.md#worth), and even the apex of astrological significance. Some of these connotations have faded with time. But most have enduring influence.

So, what exactly is [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)? Do its different connotations hang together in any principled way? Does [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) understood as “universal [human](dictionary.md#human) [worth](dictionary.md#worth)”, for example, have any meaningful connection to “social [rank](dictionary.md#rank)” or “personal integrity”? Is [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) primarily a [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) or a political and [legal](dictionary.md#legal) one? Even [assuming](dictionary.md#assume) we can make [sense](dictionary.md#sense) of its different [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning), what does [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [demand](dictionary.md#demand) of us? What does it mean to [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) or [respect](dictionary.md#respect) it? Does it [ground](dictionary.md#ground) [rights](dictionary.md#right)? If so, which ones? And where does the idea of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) come from? What, in other words, is its history?

This entry [will](dictionary.md#will) take up these questions, but without any pretense of being exhaustive. The goal is to provide a general guide to existing [theory](dictionary.md#theory) and debate, with a focus on philosophical approaches to [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), and mostly as it figures into the western tradition. The vast literature makes anything more ambitious than this unrealistic, even for an encyclopedic survey.

## 1. A Historical Primer

In the opening sentence of its preamble, the 1948 Declaration of [Human Rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights) affirms the “[inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” and “[equal](dictionary.md#equal) and [inalienable](dictionary.md#inalienable) [rights](dictionary.md#right) of all [members](dictionary.md#member) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) family” as the “[foundation](dictionary.md#foundation) of [freedom](dictionary.md#freedom), [justice](dictionary.md#justice) and peace in the world” (UN 1948). This [claim](dictionary.md#claim) would surprise our [modern](dictionary.md#modern) ancestors. Until about 1830–1850, neither the English term “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity),” nor its Latin root *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)*, nor the French counterpart *dignité*, had any stable currency as [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) “the unearned [status](dictionary.md#status) or [worth](dictionary.md#worth) of all [persons](dictionary.md#person)”, let alone the [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) of universal [rights](dictionary.md#right) or [equality](dictionary.md#equality). Instead, in everything from Hobbes’s *Leviathan* (1651) to Samuel Johnson’s *Dictionary* (1755) to Webster’s *Compendious Dictionary* (1806), “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” was primarily [used](dictionary.md#use) with a [conventional](dictionary.md#conventional) [merit](dictionary.md#merit) connotation—something like the “[rank](dictionary.md#rank) of [elevation](dictionary.md#elevation)” that Johnson officially gave it.

How did this sea change in [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) come about? The UN Declaration makes clear that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s moral-political [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) had become normalized by 1948. But what happened before 1948 that explains this transformation? These are not easy questions to answer. Although theorists often include historical remarks in their inquiries, they are just as often brief and subservient to some further, non-historical point. The result is a great many half-told stories about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s past.

There are some notable exceptions. For some time, [legal](dictionary.md#legal) theorists have been etching out the details of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s historical role in [law](dictionary.md#law) and jurisprudence, especially in connection to [rights](dictionary.md#right). Second, theological inquiries into [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) often engage an older history of ideas, especially the Renaissance thinker Pico della Mirandola or scholastic debates about the biblical [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) of *imago Dei*. Third, there is a considerable [body](dictionary.md#body) of literature on the [Enlightenment](dictionary.md#enlightenment) luminaire, Immanuel Kant, and his famous [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [humans](dictionary.md#human) do not have a “[price](dictionary.md#price)”, only a [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) and incomparable [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or *[Würde](dictionary.md#würde)*—usually translated as “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” (see, e.g., Korsgaard 1986; Meyer 1987; Hill 1992; Kofman 1982 [1997]; Wood 1999; Kain 2009). Let us turn to these various exceptions, and their challenges.

### 1.1 The [legal](dictionary.md#legal) history of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)

The connection between [law](dictionary.md#law) and [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) strikes many as socially and morally urgent. It is thus unsurprising that some serious history of this connection already exists, especially in relation to [rights](dictionary.md#right) [theory](dictionary.md#theory) (see, e.g., Eberle 2002 or Barak 2015). Nevertheless, the bulk of this history does not look back very far.

For example, Lewis (2007) gives a wonderful overview of the idea of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in international [law](dictionary.md#law), but his focus is on the writing of, and reaction to, the 1945 UN Charter and 1948 Declaration of [Human Rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights). Or consider McCrudden’s impressive 2013 edited volume, *[Understanding](dictionary.md#understand) [Human Dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity).* The historical chapters of this volume make important contributions, but again the focus is largely the twentieth century. Scott’s chapter (2013), for example, begins by observing that the 1848 French decree to abolish [slavery](dictionary.md#slavery) motivates itself from the consideration “that [slavery](dictionary.md#slavery) is an assault upon [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) (*la dignité humaine*)” (2013: 61). She then nicely explores the idea of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in the context of post-slavery Louisiana c.1862–96. However, the chapter then jumps forward to a [comparison](dictionary.md#comparison) with Brazilian society c.1970–2012. Moyn’s chapter (2013) examines early and middle twentieth century constitutional debates to show that the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [labors](dictionary.md#labor) under poorly appreciated debts to a specifically Christian [conception](dictionary.md#conception) of [democracy](dictionary.md#democracy), and for this [reason](dictionary.md#reason), Moyn argues, we should be skeptical about the long-term [utility](dictionary.md#utility) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) for secular [rights](dictionary.md#right) [theory](dictionary.md#theory). And Goos’s chapter (2013) offers a close examination of the role of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in German thought, but the focus is on post-World [War](dictionary.md#war) II interpretation of the German *Grundgesetz* (Basic [Law](dictionary.md#law)).[[1](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-1)]

A longer [legal](dictionary.md#legal) history can be found in McCrudden (2008), whose concise review of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) reaches back to classical Roman thought. McCrudden argues that we can trace the [merit](dictionary.md#merit) connotation of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as “[elevated](dictionary.md#elevate) social [rank](dictionary.md#rank)” to the Roman idea of “*[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas) homini*” (2008: 656); but also, and crucially, he argues that we can trace our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) moral-political [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of the “basic [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status) of [human](dictionary.md#human) [persons](dictionary.md#person)” to this same period, when Cicero introduced the idea of “the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) race” (see also, Cancik 2002). This [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about Cicero is echoed in Michael Rosen’s 2012, *[Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): Its History and [Meaning](dictionary.md#meaning)*, which is another important entry into dedicated history that focuses on [legal](dictionary.md#legal) connections. Rosen’s history is mostly from a bird’s eye view, but, like McCrudden’s, Rosen’s history has the [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue) of taking a long view that stretches back to antiquity. Moreover, Rosen offers some nuanced [reflections](dictionary.md#reflection) on eighteenth and nineteenth century connections, including Kant’s influence on the writing of the German *Grundgesetz*.

Finally, when it comes to [legal](dictionary.md#legal) history, Darwall (2017) offers a sophisticated analysis of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s connections to western [Enlightenment](dictionary.md#enlightenment) [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception) of jurisprudence stretching back to the sixteenth century. Importantly, however, Darwall’s history challenges McCrudden’s and Rosen’s appeal to Cicero as a key source. We [will](dictionary.md#will) return to this scholarly disagreement and Darwall’s competing proposal below ([§1.2.2](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#KantPlat) and [§1.2.4](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#CicePlat)).

### 1.2 Four Origin Stories

Given the present popularity of studying [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), we should not only expect the historical contours of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to become clearer in coming years, but also for them to be occasionally redrawn. A few important platitudes have already been challenged.

### 1.2.1 The revolutionary platitude

The western creed of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) stems from the [wisdom](dictionary.md#wisdom) of eighteenth-century revolutionary thinkers such as Thomas Jefferson, Alexander Hamilton, or Gilbert du Motier, the Marquis de Lafayette. At the founding of new [liberal](dictionary.md#liberal) states like America, or the reformation of existing ones like England or France, political sages like these propounded the [inviolable](dictionary.md#inviolable) [value](dictionary.md#value) of [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s.

In reality, one looks in vain for [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in the founding documents of these new republics. The term appears a few times in the English Bill of [Rights](dictionary.md#right) (1689), but not with our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) moral-political [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning). It appears once in the French *Déclaration des Droits de l’Homme et du Citoyen* (1789), but the connotation is of the [privileges](dictionary.md#privilege) that attend public or political [office](dictionary.md#office). And for all its fiery rhetoric about [equality](dictionary.md#equality) and the “[inalienable](dictionary.md#inalienable)” [rights](dictionary.md#right) of man, the US Declaration of Independence does not mention [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) at all. Nor does the US Constitution. In fact, it is not until the Mexican Constitution of 1917 and the 1919 Weimer Constitution, that the term appears in a constitutional context *possibly* with its moral-political connotation (McCrudden 2008; Debes 2009 and 2017b). To this corrective evidence, we should add the testimony of an entirely different set of historical voices—from Sojourner [Truth](dictionary.md#truth), David Walker, Anna Wheeler, and William Thompson, to Susan B. Anthony, Frederick Douglass, James Rapier, and Ida B. Wells—who remind us that the revolutionary platitude was contradicted by the lived reality *within* these new republics. These voices decried the systematic oppression and often bloody inhumanity that stained the supposedly egalitarian societies in which they lived.

### 1.2.2 The Kantian platitude

The early [modern](dictionary.md#modern) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) originates with Immanuel Kant, who in his 1785 *Groundwork for the [Metaphysics](dictionary.md#metaphysics) of [Morals](dictionary.md#moral)*, [argued](dictionary.md#argue) that all [persons](dictionary.md#person) have an [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [value](dictionary.md#value), or [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) their [rational](dictionary.md#rational) [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy). This [value](dictionary.md#value) commands a [distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [respect](dictionary.md#respect), which we express by abiding by certain limits in our [treatment](dictionary.md#treatment) of others. Thus, Kant [argued](dictionary.md#argue) that we have a [categorical](dictionary.md#categorical) [duty](dictionary.md#duty) to [treat](dictionary.md#treat) [persons](dictionary.md#person) always “as an [end](dictionary.md#end)” and “never merely as a [means](dictionary.md#means)” (*Groundwork*, 4:429).

This is the greatest dogma about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in philosophy. But there are [good](dictionary.md#good) [reasons](dictionary.md#reason) to rethink it in favor of a more complicated history of ideas. First, although it is well [known](dictionary.md#know) that Kant is indebted to Rousseau in various ways (see especially Beiser 1992), recent scholarship suggests that when it comes to his ideas about “[humanity](dictionary.md#humanity)” and “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”, the debt runs deeper than is generally understood (James 2013; Hanley 2017; Sensen 2017). Sensen also argues that it is a longstanding interpretive mistake to think that Kant *[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)* the [obligation](dictionary.md#obligation) to [respect](dictionary.md#respect) others on any “absolute [inner](dictionary.md#inner) [value](dictionary.md#value)” that [humans](dictionary.md#human) possess; and that “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” is not the name Kant gave to such a [value](dictionary.md#value) anyway (Sensen 2011 & 2017; see also Meyer 1987). Relatedly, Debes (2021) argues that [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) philosophers have greatly overestimated Kant’s influence on the historical development of our [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for [persons](dictionary.md#person).

On top of these corrections, Darwall (2017) argues that the conceptual link between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right) does not originate with Kant. According to Darwall, only certain [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [will](dictionary.md#will) support the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [inferences](dictionary.md#inference) about [respect](dictionary.md#respect) that could [justify](dictionary.md#justify) [using](dictionary.md#use) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to [ground](dictionary.md#ground) [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights). Namely, those [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception) that render [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as a [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) authoritative [standing](dictionary.md#standing) to make “second-personal” [claims](dictionary.md#claim)—that is, [claims](dictionary.md#claim) by one [person](dictionary.md#person) *to* another. However, the original insight for this crucial point, Darwall further argues, comes from the [natural law](dictionary.md#natural%20law)yer Samuel Pufendorf (see also Darwall 2012).

Writing a century before Kant, Pufendorf [argued](dictionary.md#argue) that [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s have perfect [natural](dictionary.md#natural) [rights](dictionary.md#right) ([rights](dictionary.md#right) [owed](dictionary.md#owe) to one another) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) a certain [moral](dictionary.md#moral) “[standing](dictionary.md#standing)” that we assign to each other as a [constitutive](dictionary.md#constitutive) part of being sociable. Whenever we [address](dictionary.md#address) another [person](dictionary.md#person) directly—e.g., with a [claim](dictionary.md#claim) like “You must allow me to speak”—we implicitly [treat](dictionary.md#treat) them as an [accountable](dictionary.md#accountable), [responsible](dictionary.md#responsible) being. Otherwise, why [address](dictionary.md#address) them at all? And the same is true when they [address](dictionary.md#address) us. In other words, according to Pufendorf, being sociable implicitly involves a *reciprocal* [assumption](dictionary.md#assumption) of basic [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [status](dictionary.md#status)—us of them, them of us—whenever we interact, and even if the [address](dictionary.md#address) is one that offends the [equal](dictionary.md#equal) [standing](dictionary.md#standing) of the other. Indeed, this is precisely when “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” becomes most urgent. Thus, Pufendorf writes:

> There seems to him to be somewhat of [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [dignatio] in the appellation of Man: so that the last and most efficacious [Argument](dictionary.md#argument) to curb the Arrogance of insulting Men, is usually, I am not a Dog but a Man as well as yourself. (1672: I.VII.I [2003]: 100)
> 

### 1.2.3 The *imago Dei* platitude

The [moralized](dictionary.md#moralize) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) does not originate in the early [modern](dictionary.md#modern) era. It was celebrated as early as the Renaissance, in Giovanni Pico della Mirandola’s 1486 *Oration on the [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of Man*. Moreover, Pico’s oration is drawn from the older, medieval Christian [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) of *imago Dei* (based on Genesis 1:26 and [Wisdom](dictionary.md#wisdom) 2:23), which tells us that we are made in “in the [image of God](dictionary.md#image%20of%20god)”, and that this likeness [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) our [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status).

This story about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is to Christian theology what the Kantian dogma is to philosophy. However, these [claims](dictionary.md#claim) are usually misleading if not false. For example, Copenhaver (2017) flatly contradicts the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that Pico was talking about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) in a [sense](dictionary.md#sense) akin to our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) moral-political [notion](dictionary.md#notion). First, Copenhaver notes that the title of the work, which draws our [attention](dictionary.md#attention), postdates Pico (who never published it). More substantively, Copenhaver argues that Pico’s [speech](dictionary.md#speech) was a public failure in large part because it was entangled with Kabbalah mysteries for how [humans](dictionary.md#human) can escape the [body](dictionary.md#body) to *increase* their [status](dictionary.md#status) by becoming [angels](dictionary.md#angel). Finally, Copenhaver points out that Pico uses the Latin *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)* only twice; and

> In neither case does [dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas) belong to [humans](dictionary.md#human), except aspirationally, and neither justifies “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” as a translation, with all the Kantian baggage of the [modern](dictionary.md#modern) English word. (2017: 134–5)
> 

Adding to this reversal of fortunes, Kent (2017) marshals extensive evidence from the scholastic tradition against the *imago Dei* platitude more generally. Although she confirms that both [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and the [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) of *imago Dei* were widely discussed by medieval Christian scholars in the Latin West, she convincingly demonstrates that these discussions did not intersect in a way that supports an [inference](dictionary.md#inference) to our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) moral-political [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of the “basic [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status) of [humans](dictionary.md#human)”. This said, not all interpretations of the Christian tradition, including the [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) of *imago Dei*, are beholden to this historical platitude. And the *imago Dei* line of inquiry on [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has a somewhat different life in the Jewish tradition.[[2](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-2)]

### 1.2.4 The Ciceronian platitude

“[Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” derives from the Latin *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)*. And while most Romans [used](dictionary.md#use) *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)* only in its [merit](dictionary.md#merit) [sense](dictionary.md#sense), a few, and Cicero in particular, had a proleptic [understanding](dictionary.md#understand) of *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)* that anticipated today’s moral-political [sense](dictionary.md#sense).

This historical view has attracted more [attention](dictionary.md#attention) lately, as evidenced by its earlier noted endorsement in McCrudden (2008) and Rosen (2012a) (see also, Englard 2000). However, it has been challenged on both philosophical and interpretive [grounds](dictionary.md#ground). For example, Miriam Griffin (2017) carefully demonstrates that the textual support for this view is very thin. She argues that straightforward lexical analysis of Roman sources offers sparing evidence for connecting *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)* to our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) moral-political [concept](dictionary.md#concept). Moreover, even if we branch out to other ancient Roman [concepts](dictionary.md#concept) to see if [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) might be hiding under different terminology, we run into a [fundamental](dictionary.md#fundamental) challenge: “Stoics and Roman moralists”, Griffin explains, “think in terms of *officia*, [obligations](dictionary.md#obligation) or [duties](dictionary.md#duty) or functions that our [nature](dictionary.md#nature), properly understood, imposes on *us*”. Correspondingly, “[t]he [entitlements](dictionary.md#entitlement) and [rights](dictionary.md#right) of those at the *receiving [end](dictionary.md#end)* of our [actions](dictionary.md#action) is not a prominent aspect of their thinking” (2017: 49).

Admittedly, Griffin allows that in some cases these [obligations](dictionary.md#obligation) or [duties](dictionary.md#duty) [entail](dictionary.md#entail) a [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [treatment](dictionary.md#treatment) of others that *accords* with our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). Still, this result does not depend on any [right](dictionary.md#right) that [persons](dictionary.md#person) have [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) “the [worth](dictionary.md#worth) of a [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being) [per se](dictionary.md#per%20se)” (2017: 64; see also Meyer 1987; and Lebech 2009, especially p. 46 n. 22.)

To these challenges, Darwall (2017) adds another problem for the Ciceronian platitude. Borrowing from the exact quotations that McCrudden and Rosen [use](dictionary.md#use) to defend [attributing](dictionary.md#attribute) a moral-political [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) to Cicero, Darwall argues:

> [Human](dictionary.md#human) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) for Cicero is nothing that could be established by [conventional](dictionary.md#conventional) patterns of deference. It is the idea, rooted in the ancient [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of a great chain of being, that [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [capacities](dictionary.md#capacity) for self-development “by study and [reflection](dictionary.md#reflection)” give [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s a “[nature](dictionary.md#nature)” “superior” to that of “cattle and other [animals](dictionary.md#animal)”. Other species are motivated only by sensory instincts, whereas [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s can “learn that sensual [pleasure](dictionary.md#pleasure) is wholly unworthy of the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) race”, and be guided by this [understanding](dictionary.md#understand).
> 
> 
> [Consequently] nothing in the Ciceronian [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) requires, or even leads naturally to, basic [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights). The [proposition](dictionary.md#proposition), for example, that “sensual [pleasure](dictionary.md#pleasure)” is “unworthy” of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is less a [thesis](dictionary.md#thesis) about what [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s are in a [position](dictionary.md#position) to [claim](dictionary.md#claim) from one another [by virtue of](dictionary.md#by%20virtue%20of) their [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) than it is an [ethical](dictionary.md#ethical) standard to which we are to live up. (2017: 182–3; Cicero quotations cited in McCrudden 2008: 657, and Rosen 2012a: 12)
> 

To be fair, Darwall’s critique hangs on two [assumptions](dictionary.md#assumption) about the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): (1) that a satisfactory account of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [will](dictionary.md#will) involve a connection to, if not a [grounding](dictionary.md#ground) for, [rights](dictionary.md#right) [claims](dictionary.md#claim); and (2) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is in no way an achievement. Both [assumptions](dictionary.md#assumption) resonate strongly with [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) moral-political talk of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). Nevertheless, [identifying](dictionary.md#identify) these [assumptions](dictionary.md#assumption) should remind us that we have not yet clearly formulated a [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). So, let us turn to that task.[[3](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-3)]

## 2. Formulating [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)

There is no single, incontestable [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). In fact, there are so many possible [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning) that it has become commonplace in the literature to worry about the expansive variety of [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception), and in turn to worry whether [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is or has become essentially [ambiguous](dictionary.md#ambiguous). And while its defenders find ways to mitigate or explain away this ambiguity, the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has its share of detractors. But we [will](dictionary.md#will) return to skeptical worries at the [end](dictionary.md#end) of this entry. For now, and granting the *[prima facie](dictionary.md#prima%20facie)* force of the ambiguity worry, four broad categories of [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) stand out across context and history:

1. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as *Gravitas:* a poise or grace associated with behavioral comportment; e.g., the sophisticated manners or elegant [speech](dictionary.md#speech) of [nobility](dictionary.md#nobility), or outward composure in the face of insult or duress.
2. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as *Integrity:* the family of ideas associated with living up to personal or social standards of character and conduct, either in one’s own eyes or the eyes of others.
3. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as *[Status](dictionary.md#status)*: [noble](dictionary.md#noble) or [elevated](dictionary.md#elevate) social [position](dictionary.md#position) or [rank](dictionary.md#rank).
4. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as *[Human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)*: the unearned [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status) that all [humans](dictionary.md#human) share equally (either [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) or constructed).

This “general schema” is rough and ready. Scholars divide the conceptual space in different ways, often advocating intersections between the foregoing four categories, making elaborations on them, or noting wrinkles within them.

For example, Kolnai (1976) argues that the primary function of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) is descriptive, not evaluative. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is a [quality](dictionary.md#quality) of [persons](dictionary.md#person), which is the fitting [object](dictionary.md#object) of a set of pro-attitudes related to both [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [appreciation](dictionary.md#appreciation) *and* aesthetic [appreciation](dictionary.md#appreciation). Thus, to be [dignified](dictionary.md#dignified) is to comport oneself in a way that is not simply a [reflection](dictionary.md#reflection) of [authority](dictionary.md#authority), [rank](dictionary.md#rank), [moral](dictionary.md#moral) uprightness, or a regimented or serious adherence to codes of conduct, but instead reflects something of “the beautiful”. As Kolnai puts it, our response to [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is characterized, at least in part, by “our devoted and admiring [appreciation](dictionary.md#appreciation) for [beauty](dictionary.md#beauty)” (1976: 252). Hence the distinction between [(1)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat1) and [(2)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat2) above (see also Brady 2007).

By [contrast](dictionary.md#contrast), although Rosen (2012a) notes that the Latin term *[dignitas](dictionary.md#dignitas)* was once part of a critical vocabulary of classical [art](dictionary.md#art) and rhetoric, [used](dictionary.md#use) “to characterize [speech](dictionary.md#speech) that was weighty and majestic, in [contrast](dictionary.md#contrast) to discourse that was light and charming” (2012a: 13), Rosen largely blends categories [(1)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat1) and [(2)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat2) into a single strand of [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning), which he identifies as “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as behavior, character or bearing that is [dignified](dictionary.md#dignified)” (2012a: 54). Rosen then accepts [(3)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat3) and [(4)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat4) but adds his own further category, which he calls “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as [treatment](dictionary.md#treatment)”: “To [treat](dictionary.md#treat) someone *with [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)* is…to *[respect](dictionary.md#respect)* their [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” (2012a: 58). As we [will](dictionary.md#will) see more fully in a moment, this addition reflects a common observation by scholars about a tight connection between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and its [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) (although, it is not common to [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that the proper [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is a separate category of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)).

Meanwhile, Kateb (2011) stresses the need to distinguish between [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) *qua* [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [humans](dictionary.md#human), and [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) *qua* [human](dictionary.md#human) species. According to Kateb, both have [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). But whereas the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of [individuals](dictionary.md#individual) can be described as a special [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) “[status](dictionary.md#status)”—as in category [(4)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat4) above—the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) species requires a further [concept](dictionary.md#concept), namely, of “stature”. He writes, “In [comparison](dictionary.md#comparison) to other species, [humanity](dictionary.md#humanity) has a stature beyond [comparison](dictionary.md#comparison)” (2011: 6). To be clear, Kateb does not think that the [human](dictionary.md#human) species has an existence above and beyond its [members](dictionary.md#member): it is not a [natural](dictionary.md#natural) kind. However, he argues that the interdependence of [humans](dictionary.md#human) is,

> so extensive, so deep, and so entangled…that for certain purposes we might just as well make the [human](dictionary.md#human) species a unified entity or [agency](dictionary.md#agency), even though we [know](dictionary.md#know) it isn’t. (2011: 6)
> 

Correspondingly, we can sensibly talk about the “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” of the species. This conclusion cuts against some [positions](dictionary.md#position) that maintain [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) “proper” can only belong to [individuals](dictionary.md#individual) (Stern 1975; Gaylin 1984; Egonsson 1998).

A more recent schema is offered by Killmister (2020). Killmister proposes three “strands” of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): personal, social, and [status](dictionary.md#status). To have personal [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), Killmister argues, is to take oneself to be [subject](dictionary.md#subject) to personal “[dignitarian](dictionary.md#dignitarian)” norms. And to have social [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is to be [subject](dictionary.md#subject) to social “[dignitarian](dictionary.md#dignitarian)” norms. What are [dignitarian](dictionary.md#dignitarian) norms? [Dignitarian](dictionary.md#dignitarian) norms are norms that either the [person](dictionary.md#person) themself, or society at large, take to be “ennobling” to uphold, or whose transgression the [person](dictionary.md#person) or society consider to be “disgraceful or debasing” (2020: 25, 29). Like Rosen, then, Killmister effectively blends categories [(1)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat1) and [(2)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat2), while at the same time drawing [attention](dictionary.md#attention) to a different organizational distinction one might make, namely, between the personal and the social. As for “[status](dictionary.md#status) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”, Killmister argues that explaining this category of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) requires a [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect). And her [argument](dictionary.md#argument) is [worth](dictionary.md#worth) elaborating because it exemplifies and fleshes out two closely related points shared by many existing [theories](dictionary.md#theory):

1. that any satisfactory [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) must explain what it [means](dictionary.md#means) to *[recognize](dictionary.md#recognize)* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity); and
2. that this [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) is best described as a [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) *[respect](dictionary.md#respect)*.

So, consider: [Dignitarian](dictionary.md#dignitarian) norms, according to Killmister, can typically be redescribed as articulating the [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect)—either self-respect (in the case of personal [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)) or [respect](dictionary.md#respect) from others (in the case of social [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)). Moreover, the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) relevant to personal and social [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), she argues, is what Stephen Darwall (1977) influentially named “[appraisal](dictionary.md#appraisal) [respect](dictionary.md#respect)”. This [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) is a [positive](dictionary.md#positive) evaluative *[attitude](dictionary.md#attitude)* or *[feeling](dictionary.md#feeling)*, which we express towards ourselves or others, for some [merit](dictionary.md#merit) of character. In this [sense](dictionary.md#sense), [respect](dictionary.md#respect) is akin to [esteem](dictionary.md#esteem). Killmister writes:

> to be highly personally [dignified](dictionary.md#dignified) is to be such that, by our own lights, we [ought](dictionary.md#ought) to hold ourselves in high [esteem](dictionary.md#esteem)…to be highly socially [dignified](dictionary.md#dignified) is to be such that, by the light of our community, they [ought](dictionary.md#ought) to hold us in high [esteem](dictionary.md#esteem). (2020: 23)
> 

By [contrast](dictionary.md#contrast), Killmister connects [status](dictionary.md#status) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to what Darwall called, “[recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) [respect](dictionary.md#respect)”. [Recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) is a way of *thinking* about oneself or others. To recognize-respect someone (at least as Darwall first explained it) is to give appropriate weight to some fact about them in our practical deliberations, and to restrict our choices or [actions](dictionary.md#action) accordingly.

Killmister thus argues,

> We come to have [status](dictionary.md#status) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), when we fall within a particular [social] category, [membership](dictionary.md#membership) in which commands respectful [treatment](dictionary.md#treatment) from others in our community. (2020: 22)
> 

She elaborates,

> [status](dictionary.md#status) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) does not call on others to [esteem](dictionary.md#esteem) us, but rather to [treat](dictionary.md#treat) us in ways appropriate to the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) thing we are. (2020: 23, emphasis added)
> 

Correspondingly, [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) [ends](dictionary.md#end) up as “an especially important instance” of [status](dictionary.md#status) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). And all [humans](dictionary.md#human) [deserve](dictionary.md#deserve) [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) the “fact” of their [membership](dictionary.md#membership) in the category “[human](dictionary.md#human)” (2020: 129–30).

This said, Killmister’s conclusion diverges from Darwall’s own account of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), which is tied to a revision he made to his [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) [respect](dictionary.md#respect), which connected [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) to the reciprocal “[authority](dictionary.md#authority)” of second-personal [address](dictionary.md#address), as discussed in the earlier historical [reflection](dictionary.md#reflection) on Pufendorf (see [§1.2.3](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#ImagDeiPlat) above; and Darwall 2006, esp. p. 14). Note also that Killmister, like Kateb, eschews thinking of “[human](dictionary.md#human)” as a [natural](dictionary.md#natural) kind, in favor of [understanding](dictionary.md#understand) it as a social kind.

### 2.1 [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) vs. [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground)

The previous section offered examples of how the general schema of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) gets modified in existing [theory](dictionary.md#theory), as well as how each category of [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) might be fleshed out. More examples could be given. But to decide between any of them, it seems crucial to ask, how *should* we formulate the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)? In other words, instead of simply cataloging first-order views about its [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning), we need to introduce some second-order criteria.

On the one hand, we need to determine the *defining [properties](dictionary.md#property)* of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): the distinguishing characteristics or explanatory [demands](dictionary.md#demand) that are supposed to apply to any contentful account of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). Such criteria might include, for example, that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is “[inherent](dictionary.md#inherent)”; that it is “incommensurable” with other [values](dictionary.md#value); that it has a “[distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [normative](dictionary.md#normative) function”; that it has an essential connection to [rights](dictionary.md#right); and so on.

On the other hand, we need to determine what *[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): we need to say what it is about [humans](dictionary.md#human), or any being with [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), that satisfies the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property). In other words, we need to answer the question: [In virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) what do we have [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)? The most common answer to this question, historically speaking, especially when it comes to [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), involves a [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy). Or if not [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy) tout court, then the “[capabilities](dictionary.md#capability)” for such [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy) (see, e.g., Nussbaum 1995, 2006a, and 2006b). Thus, one finds many variations of the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [humans](dictionary.md#human) have [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) their [capacity](dictionary.md#capacity) for (or exercise of) “choice” or “[rational](dictionary.md#rational) [agency](dictionary.md#agency)”—[claims](dictionary.md#claim) that are often tethered to the earlier discussed historical platitude about Kant. This said, alternatives to the [grounding](dictionary.md#ground) question about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) include brute species [membership](dictionary.md#membership), [sentience](dictionary.md#sentience), the creative power of [humanity](dictionary.md#humanity), creation “in the [image of God](dictionary.md#image%20of%20god)”, a politically conferred [status](dictionary.md#status) as “[rights](dictionary.md#right) bearer”, the [capacity](dictionary.md#capacity) for empathy and caring relationships, the earlier mentioned “personality”, the concrete “particularity” of an [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [person](dictionary.md#person), and the possession of “perspective”.

Sorting these views is not easy for a few [reasons](dictionary.md#reason). First, some of the operative [concepts](dictionary.md#concept), such as “[autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy)”, are themselves hotly disputed. Second, there is no pre-theoretical [reason](dictionary.md#reason) to deny multiple ways of satisfying any given definitional criteria. That is, any given proposal for the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) might be satisfied by more than one [ground](dictionary.md#ground). For example, depending on the criteria, [humans](dictionary.md#human) might “have” [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) both [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy) *and* [sentience](dictionary.md#sentience), or both divine creation *and* our [capacity](dictionary.md#capacity) for empathy, and so on. Third, twentieth century theorists rarely took a second-order view on their [subject](dictionary.md#subject) and methods. In turn, they often confused or at least failed to clarify which of the two foregoing challenges they were trying to tackle, articulating [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) or articulating [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground).

Thankfully, twenty-first century [formulations](dictionary.md#formulation) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) are marked by increasingly conscientious attempts to articulate the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), and to do so in a way that might guide discussion about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground). For example, in “Bedrock [Truths](dictionary.md#truth) and the [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the [Individual](dictionary.md#individual)”, Iglesias (2001) distinguishes between historically older, “restricted” [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) associated with general schema [(1)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat1), [(2)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat2), and [(3)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat3); and, on the other hand, what she calls “universal” [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning) associated with schema [(4)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat4), “[human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)”. She further argues that any satisfactory universalist account must render [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) as (4a) in some [sense](dictionary.md#sense) “[inherent](dictionary.md#inherent)” or “[intrinsic](dictionary.md#intrinsic)”; and (4b) the “[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)” of basic [rights](dictionary.md#right). Regarding the latter, Iglesias writes:

> The connection is essential. It is rooted in the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) [person](dictionary.md#person), in [human](dictionary.md#human) self-understanding as constituted by the bedrock [truths](dictionary.md#truth) about what and who we are…The universal [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), as [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) to every [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being), expresses the [intrinsic](dictionary.md#intrinsic) [good](dictionary.md#good) that the [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being) is. The [distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights) articulate those basic [intrinsic](dictionary.md#intrinsic) [goods](dictionary.md#good) proper to, and expressive of, each one’s [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), individually and in community relationships—as dimensions of our very being. These basic [goods](dictionary.md#good)—guaranteed as [rights](dictionary.md#right)—must be [recognized](dictionary.md#recognize), [respected](dictionary.md#respect), and promoted so that the [intrinsic](dictionary.md#intrinsic) [good](dictionary.md#good) that the [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being) is himself or herself, personally and as an [individual](dictionary.md#individual), may be preserved and assured. Thus, the [ground](dictionary.md#ground) for advocacy and defense of [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights) resides on what and who the [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being) is, as a [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being), namely on his or her [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). (2001: 130)
> 

By [comparison](dictionary.md#comparison), Shultziner (2007) adopts a “philosophical-linguistic” method to distinguish moral-philosophical uses of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) from political and [legal](dictionary.md#legal) “functions” of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept), especially the [use](dictionary.md#use) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to [ground](dictionary.md#ground) specific [rights](dictionary.md#right) and enforceable [duties](dictionary.md#duty). Regarding the latter, Shultziner stresses that in real world contexts, the [rights](dictionary.md#right) which the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is [used](dictionary.md#use) to [ground](dictionary.md#ground) vary considerably:

> There is no fixed and universal content that spouts out of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) and, hence, its content and [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning) are determined separately in each [legal](dictionary.md#legal) document in accordance with the political [agreement](dictionary.md#agreement) achieved at the time. (2007: 78)
> 

This might seem to express skepticism about the possibility of any general, stable [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). In fact, it underlines the point of Iglesias’s final criterion [(4b)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat4b); namely, that a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is the [grounding](dictionary.md#ground) connection to [rights](dictionary.md#right). In other words, strictly speaking, Shultziner agrees with Iglesias that at least *one* defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)—in political contexts—is that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) [rights](dictionary.md#right), even though the content of these [rights](dictionary.md#right) vary greatly because the [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) itself vary greatly. [[4](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-4)]

Another example of second-order thinking can be found in Debes (2009), who argues that any satisfactory “[formal](dictionary.md#formal)” account of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)—by which he [means](dictionary.md#means) an account of its defining [properties](dictionary.md#property)—must pick out a “[distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive)” [value](dictionary.md#value) or [status](dictionary.md#status) belonging to [humans](dictionary.md#human). And it must be [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) in the [sense](dictionary.md#sense) that it (a) is not [merit](dictionary.md#merit) based, but instead unearned; (b) is in some [sense](dictionary.md#sense) “incommensurable” with other [values](dictionary.md#value); and (c) makes [sense](dictionary.md#sense) of the basic “[normative](dictionary.md#normative) function” of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept). Regarding (c), Debes argues that the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) does not purport to be only or even mainly descriptive. Instead, it has a [normative](dictionary.md#normative) purpose or role, namely, “to *set off* in our practical deliberations whatever ‘[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’ is applied to—to guard or protect what *has* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” (2009: 61–2).

Or consider Waldron (2012), who tracks a confusion in [legal](dictionary.md#legal) discussions of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) between (on the one hand) definitional [claims](dictionary.md#claim) about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) and (on the other hand) [claims](dictionary.md#claim) about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s practical [conditions](dictionary.md#condition); that is, the [conditions](dictionary.md#condition) of its [moral](dictionary.md#moral), social, or political [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition). Thus, Waldron notes the way that various [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights) charters [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is “[inherent](dictionary.md#inherent)” in the [human](dictionary.md#human) [person](dictionary.md#person); but also “command us to make heroic efforts to *establish* everyone’s [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” (2012: 16, emphasis added). Such [claims](dictionary.md#claim), he writes, may look like an equivocation akin to [claiming](dictionary.md#claim), as Rousseau once did, that “Man is born [free](dictionary.md#free) but everywhere is in chains”—a [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that Jeremy Bentham later called “miserable nonsense”. However, Waldron argues that Bentham missed an easy explanation of Rousseau:

> [A [person](dictionary.md#person)] might be [identified](dictionary.md#identify) as a [free](dictionary.md#free) man in a [juridical](dictionary.md#juridical) [sense](dictionary.md#sense)—that is his [legal](dictionary.md#legal) [status](dictionary.md#status)—even though he is found in [conditions](dictionary.md#condition) of [slavery](dictionary.md#slavery)…So, similarly, one might say that every [human](dictionary.md#human) [person](dictionary.md#person) is [free](dictionary.md#free) as a matter of [status](dictionary.md#status)—the [status](dictionary.md#status) accorded to him by his creator—even though it is the case that some [humans](dictionary.md#human) are actually in chains and need to have their [freedom](dictionary.md#freedom) [represented](dictionary.md#represent) as the content of a [normative](dictionary.md#normative) [demand](dictionary.md#demand). (2012: 16–17)
> 

To be clear, Waldron quickly adds that one might shy away from the specific premise of divine creation as a way of [grounding](dictionary.md#ground) [human](dictionary.md#human) [freedom](dictionary.md#freedom). That metaphysical premise is only an example. His overarching point is that it is not incoherent to make this *kind* of [claim](dictionary.md#claim). Because the operative [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the [status](dictionary.md#status) of [human](dictionary.md#human) [persons](dictionary.md#person)—namely, that they are [free](dictionary.md#free)—is a [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of “man” (in a [juridical](dictionary.md#juridical) [sense](dictionary.md#sense)), it [follows](dictionary.md#follow) that we can distinguish this [claim](dictionary.md#claim) from any further [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about what [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) this “[free](dictionary.md#free)” [status](dictionary.md#status), as well any [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the worldly [conditions](dictionary.md#condition) that are required for this [status](dictionary.md#status) to be expressed, [realized](dictionary.md#realize), or [recognized](dictionary.md#recognize).

Keeping this in [mind](dictionary.md#mind), we can now [understand](dictionary.md#understand) why Waldron thinks that we are not necessarily equivocating if we [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is *[inherent](dictionary.md#inherent)*, but nevertheless enjoin others to *establish* it in [practice](dictionary.md#practice). He writes,

> On the one hand, the term [“[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”] may be [used](dictionary.md#use) to convey something about the [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [rank](dictionary.md#rank) or [status](dictionary.md#status) of [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s; on the other hand, it may be [used](dictionary.md#use) concomitantly to convey the [demand](dictionary.md#demand) that [rank](dictionary.md#rank) or [status](dictionary.md#status) should actually be [recognized](dictionary.md#recognize). (2012: 17)
> 

Importantly Waldron further argues that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) finds its proper conceptual home not in [morality](dictionary.md#morality), but in the [legal](dictionary.md#legal) context of [rights](dictionary.md#right). He writes, “[law](dictionary.md#law) is its [natural](dictionary.md#natural) habitat” (2012: 13). This is because, he argues, [rights](dictionary.md#right) articulate, or flesh out, the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [status](dictionary.md#status) that [modern](dictionary.md#modern) [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) typically include or [allude](dictionary.md#allude) to; but also, which his own [theory](dictionary.md#theory) depends on. Thus, for Waldron, it is historically mistaken and theoretically confused to [ground](dictionary.md#ground) our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) on thick metaphysical bases—some [inviolable](dictionary.md#inviolable) [value](dictionary.md#value) that “inheres” in [humans](dictionary.md#human), whether by dint of divine creation or otherwise. Instead, on Waldron’s view, the [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is essentially Samuel Johnson’s old idea of “[elevated](dictionary.md#elevate) [rank](dictionary.md#rank)”, albeit *refashioned* in the [modern](dictionary.md#modern) [consciousness](dictionary.md#consciousness) to apply to all [humans](dictionary.md#human).

In other words, Waldron explains the historical revolution in our [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as turning on a leveling *up* of all [people](dictionary.md#people) to the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) social [status](dictionary.md#status) once reserved only for the [noble](dictionary.md#noble) elite. We simply reappropriated the term “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” to describe this high [status](dictionary.md#status), ditching its original “sortal” connotation for a new egalitarian one (2012: 57–61). Furthermore, he [claims](dictionary.md#claim) that all this happened through (or mainly through) the [paradigm](dictionary.md#paradigm) of [rights](dictionary.md#right). Oversimplifying for sake of [argument](dictionary.md#argument): Waldron thinks that [people](dictionary.md#people) of lower social [rank](dictionary.md#rank) successfully annexed the [rights](dictionary.md#right) reserved to those of higher [ranks](dictionary.md#rank), by reinterpreting those [rights](dictionary.md#right) as *[human](dictionary.md#human)* [rights](dictionary.md#right). Hence why [rights](dictionary.md#right) remain the critical apparatus for fleshing out the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [status](dictionary.md#status) relevant to “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”, and why the proper home of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is [law](dictionary.md#law), not [morality](dictionary.md#morality).

Waldron’s view on [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has been influential, so a few more notes about it are fitting. First, in making these [claims](dictionary.md#claim) about dignity-as-elevated-rank, Waldron partly aligns himself with Appiah (2010), although Waldron does not seem to notice this. Second, Waldron’s [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the “home” of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is contentious. It is *[prima facie](dictionary.md#prima%20facie)* hard to square with everyday [claims](dictionary.md#claim) about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), which seem evenly spread over [moral](dictionary.md#moral), political, and [legal](dictionary.md#legal) contexts. And it contradicts Shultziner (2007), discussed above. Moreover, Dimock (2012), Herzog (2012), and Rosen (2012b) challenge it directly, among others (see, e.g., Bird 2013).

Most important, however, in the greater context of discussing the defining prosperities of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), it is to register Waldron’s underlying suggestion about an “essential” connection between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right). As we have seen, this [claim](dictionary.md#claim) finds wide traction in the literature, even in accounts of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) that are at odds with the Appiah-Waldron view of “dignity-as-elevated-rank”. For example, considering only accounts reviewed so far, Iglesias (2001) made the same [claim](dictionary.md#claim); Darwall (2017) implies it; and both Kateb (2011) and Killmister (2020) endorse it in different ways. This raises an obvious question: What exactly is the connection between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right)?

### 2.2 Is a connection to [rights](dictionary.md#right) a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)?

It is beyond the scope of this entry to answer this question in anything close to a comprehensive way. ([Good](dictionary.md#good) starting points include Meyer and Parent 1992; Gewirth 1992, Carozza 2008 and 2013; and Tasioulas 2013). Instead, let us draw out a few points about the connection between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right) as it bears specifically on attempts to make it a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) itself. To get at these points, consider a final proposal about the definitional criteria of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), from Fitzpatrick (2013):

> The primary [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is the idea of a certain [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [status](dictionary.md#status) involving possession of an [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent), unearned [form](dictionary.md#form) of [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [standing](dictionary.md#standing)—a basic [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [standing](dictionary.md#standing) that is neither [dependent](dictionary.md#dependent) on one’s being of [use](dictionary.md#use) or [interest](dictionary.md#interest) to others nor based on one’s [merits](dictionary.md#merit), and which essentially calls for certain [forms](dictionary.md#form) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect). (2013: 5546)
> 

Fitzpatrick presents this definition within the context of an encyclopedic effort to capture its [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning). As such, he is understandably aiming at something [generic](dictionary.md#generic). However, in the light of our analysis so far, the tensions in his attempt are manifest, albeit instructive.

First, describing [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as primarily a “[status](dictionary.md#status)” instead of a “[value](dictionary.md#value)” aligns with those like Waldron, who make a principled distinction between their accounts and all kinds of “[worth](dictionary.md#worth)” or “[value](dictionary.md#value)” [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) (see, e.g., Killmister 2020, who emphasizes this distinction; and Dan-Cohen 2012, for analysis on its import to Waldron). However, Fitzpatrick immediately equivocates on this point, redefining [status](dictionary.md#status) as, “[worth](dictionary.md#worth) *or* [standing](dictionary.md#standing)”. Similarly, consider that those like Appiah-Waldron who think [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) depends on a refashioned idea of high social [rank](dictionary.md#rank), must, strictly speaking, reject the [property](dictionary.md#property) of “inherentness” that Fitzpatrick appeals to. But they *might* allow for the alternative description of “unearned”, especially if this is interpreted as historically indexed to the refashioned [conception](dictionary.md#conception) of [status](dictionary.md#status).

More important for the question about [rights](dictionary.md#right) is to consider Fitzpatrick’s final remark that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), “calls for certain [forms](dictionary.md#form) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect)”. At first blush, this appeal might seem to be merely a refinement of Debes’s (2009) [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has a [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) “[normative](dictionary.md#normative) function”. If so, it would be a refinement that is common to many theorists, as we already noted in [§2.1](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#DignDefiPropVsDignGrou). However, Fitzpatrick immediately connects this [generic](dictionary.md#generic) [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about [respect](dictionary.md#respect) to two specific elaborations of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [normative](dictionary.md#normative) function. He writes:

> It is in this [sense](dictionary.md#sense) [of an [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [standing](dictionary.md#standing) that calls for [respect](dictionary.md#respect)] that many hold that all [persons](dictionary.md#person) possess a [fundamental](dictionary.md#fundamental), [inalienable](dictionary.md#inalienable) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), which [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) [1] basic [rights](dictionary.md#right)…or [2] the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to make [claims](dictionary.md#claim) and [demands](dictionary.md#demand) of others. (2013: 5546)
> 

Both [claims](dictionary.md#claim) [merit](dictionary.md#merit) elaboration.

The first [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim1) gives voice to the strongest, or at least the most direct way to make the connection to [rights](dictionary.md#right) a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), by making [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) the *[normative](dictionary.md#normative) basis* of [rights](dictionary.md#right). Thus, suppose one asks of any given [right](dictionary.md#right) *x*, what justifies the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that “*x* is a [human](dictionary.md#human) [right](dictionary.md#right)”? The answer for those who take this line is, “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”. Or at least, “[human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)”.

Now, in one [sense](dictionary.md#sense), [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim1) is unsurprising given that it has [legal](dictionary.md#legal) reality. For example, although the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) is only [implicit](dictionary.md#implicit) in the *[Universal Declaration of [Human Rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights)](dictionary.md#universal%20declaration%20of%20human%20rights)* (1948) as well as the original *Charter of the United Nations* (1945), a 1966 amendment to the *Charter* made it [explicit](dictionary.md#explicit), declaring that [rights](dictionary.md#right) “derived from the [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of [persons](dictionary.md#person)”. Moreover, [claims](dictionary.md#claim) like this have become increasingly common in state constitutions, especially in the west, as well as other international charters and humanitarian declarations (see, e.g., Schachter 1983, Iglesias 2001, Shultziner 2007, and McCrudden 2008, for summaries and analysis).

And yet, it is important to note that such [legal](dictionary.md#legal) [claims](dictionary.md#claim) are almost always brute assertions. They are not conscientious attempts at [theory](dictionary.md#theory). More exactly, they do not [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that any adequate [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (as a [concept](dictionary.md#concept)) *must* account for the [grounding](dictionary.md#ground) relationship between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right). This is important because, *pace* FitzPatrick, or those like James Griffin (2008) who adamantly stress [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as the [foundation](dictionary.md#foundation) of [rights](dictionary.md#right), some theorists challenge or avoid or even reject [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim1). This includes skeptics who challenge the viability of any existing [substantive](dictionary.md#substantive) accounts of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to [ground](dictionary.md#ground) [rights](dictionary.md#right) (discussed later). But it also includes some theorists who defend [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (in one [form](dictionary.md#form) or other). For example, Waldron skirts around the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) commitment at issue in [claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]. He allows that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) involves each [person](dictionary.md#person) thinking of themselves, “as a self-originating source of [legal](dictionary.md#legal) and [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [claims](dictionary.md#claim)” (2012: 60), but the overarching [implication](dictionary.md#implication) of his [argument](dictionary.md#argument) is that [rights](dictionary.md#right) *articulate* the [nature](dictionary.md#nature) of the “high” [status](dictionary.md#status) [humans](dictionary.md#human) have been [elevated](dictionary.md#elevate) to. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is thus not the [normative](dictionary.md#normative) *basis* of [rights](dictionary.md#right) on his view. Instead, [legal](dictionary.md#legal) systems, and [rights](dictionary.md#right) in particular, “constitute and vindicate [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), both in their [explicit](dictionary.md#explicit) provisions and in their overall modus operandi” (2012: 67).

Killmister (2020) [follows](dictionary.md#follow) Waldron’s lead, but she is more [explicit](dictionary.md#explicit). “[H]uman [rights](dictionary.md#right)”, she argues, “[form](dictionary.md#form) part of our articulation of how [members](dictionary.md#member) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) kind [ought](dictionary.md#ought) to be [treated](dictionary.md#treat)” (2020: 143). And, like Shultziner (2007), she warns against attempts to derive the content of [rights](dictionary.md#right) directly from [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), a warning that further tells against making [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim1) part of the definitional criteria. Relatedly, Meyer (1989) concludes that insofar as we aim to explain [rights](dictionary.md#right), we can never successfully explain [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): “While having and exercising certain [rights](dictionary.md#right) is important to our [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s”, Meyer argues,

> what we commonly regard as essential to [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) would not be explained even if we were able to delineate all of the relevant [rights](dictionary.md#right) and the particular ways in which each of them expresses or protects [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). (1989: 521)
> 

Meyer’s point is enhanced (perhaps even preempted) by Donnelly’s (1982) sociological [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that in cultures where “[rights](dictionary.md#right)” are or once were a relatively foreign [concept](dictionary.md#concept), [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is not. If Donnelly is correct, then excepting motivational purposes, [rights](dictionary.md#right) [theory](dictionary.md#theory) is arguably a non-starter for a proper account of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) (see also, Howard 1992, who partly recapitulates Donnelly’s point).

Piling onto this, Schroeder (2012) and Moyn (2013) warn that the “[normative](dictionary.md#normative) basis” version of the connection [claim](dictionary.md#claim) between [rights](dictionary.md#right) and [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)—i.e., [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim1)—leaves [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) vulnerable, because our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) carries underappreciated debts to non-secular, theological traditions (see also Addis 2013). And Valentini (2017) argues that the plausibility of [claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1] depends on which other defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) we want to defend. Specifically, if [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is taken to be [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent), she argues, then [claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1] becomes not only “uninformative” because “the [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is opaque”; it also becomes counterproductive to the aims of most [rights](dictionary.md#right) [theories](dictionary.md#theory). This is because, she continues, the inherentness [claim](dictionary.md#claim) pushes [rights](dictionary.md#right) debates, “into deep metaphysical waters”, and distracts us from the main political function of [rights](dictionary.md#right) (especially, [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights)), namely, to constrain, “the conduct of powerful actors” (2017: 862–3).

Now consider connection [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [2]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim2): [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) the *[authority](dictionary.md#authority)* to make [claims](dictionary.md#claim) in general. Some have [argued](dictionary.md#argue) that the first connection [[claim](dictionary.md#claim) [1]](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#claim1), which makes [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) the [normative](dictionary.md#normative) basis of [rights](dictionary.md#right), is ultimately just a special case of the second [claim](dictionary.md#claim) [2], about [authority](dictionary.md#authority). Perhaps most well-known in this [respect](dictionary.md#respect) is Feinberg (1970 [1980]), who, in the course of [arguing](dictionary.md#argue) that the [act](dictionary.md#act) or [practice](dictionary.md#practice) of making interpersonal [claims](dictionary.md#claim) is what “gives [rights](dictionary.md#right) their special [moral](dictionary.md#moral) significance”, adds this passing remark about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): “what is called ‘[human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)’ may simply *be* the recognizable [capacity](dictionary.md#capacity) to assert [claims](dictionary.md#claim)” (1970 [1980: 151]). Admittedly, Feinberg does not unpack the point. And it is not perfectly clear if [authority](dictionary.md#authority) [per se](dictionary.md#per%20se) is part of his [conception](dictionary.md#conception) of this “[capacity](dictionary.md#capacity)”. Still, the point seems to resonate with [claim](dictionary.md#claim) [2], especially if we pair Feinberg’s point with Darwall’s views about second-personal [authority](dictionary.md#authority), considered earlier. Indeed, Meyer (1989) tries to unpack Feinberg in a way that seems to anticipate Darwall’s view. (See also, Forst 2011, who offers a similar line of [argument](dictionary.md#argument) to Darwall, which he credits partly to Ernst Bloch. But see Sangiovanni 2017, who [objects](dictionary.md#object) to both Darwall and Forst, esp. pp. 50–60).

### 2.3 Are distinctiveness and fragility defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)?

It is possible to take an even wider view on the defining criteria of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). For example, consider Etinson (2020), who [represents](dictionary.md#represent) another case of conscientious second-order theorizing. Etinson argues that a complete [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) should explain not only what “[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)” [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)—“that is, how and why one comes to possess or lose it”—but also its “proper” method—that is, “how inquiry into all of this should proceed and be understood” (2020: 356). The latter [demand](dictionary.md#demand) is akin to calling for an articulation of the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), in the [sense](dictionary.md#sense) that we have been discussing. However, Etinson adds an important [substantive](dictionary.md#substantive) [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about this method: He agrees that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is partly distinguished by something like a [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) “[normative](dictionary.md#normative) function”, but sharpens this [claim](dictionary.md#claim) by suggesting that to explain this function, we should focus specifically on the [conditions](dictionary.md#condition) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [violation](dictionary.md#violation). This refinement is important for two broad [reasons](dictionary.md#reason).

First, over its long history, inquiry into [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) has often been conjoined with considerations of what it [means](dictionary.md#means) to [harm](dictionary.md#harm) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): What constitutes disrespect of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)? Can we lose it? Can it be destroyed? And so on. Call this, the question of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s “fragility”. Sometimes, this question is taken up within a direct examination of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (see, e.g., Kaplan 1999 or Dussel 2003). At other times, the [motivation](dictionary.md#motivation) is [pragmatic](dictionary.md#pragmatic). For example, in his [reflection](dictionary.md#reflection) on [legal](dictionary.md#legal) appeals to [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), Schacter (1983) writes:

> When [[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)] has been invoked in concrete situations, it has been generally [assumed](dictionary.md#assume) that a [violation](dictionary.md#violation) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) can be [recognized](dictionary.md#recognize) even if the abstract term cannot be defined. “I [know](dictionary.md#know) it when I see it even if I cannot tell you what it is”. (1983: 849)
> 

And in some cases, these [reflections](dictionary.md#reflection) go the other way around; that is, *from* an analysis of a specific [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) dehumanizing [harm](dictionary.md#harm) ([slavery](dictionary.md#slavery), torture, rape, genocide; [alienation](dictionary.md#alienation), humiliation, embarrassment) *to* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), or one of its close cognates like “[humanity](dictionary.md#humanity)” (see especially, Neuhäuser 2011; Morawa 2013; Haslam 2014; Frick 2021; Mikkola 2021).[[5](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-5)]

But whatever the context, it is crucial to distinguish between first-order encounters with [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s fragility, and second-order efforts that try to draw a connection between a [negative](dictionary.md#negative) [methodology](dictionary.md#methodology) centered on the question of fragility and the [positive](dictionary.md#positive) effort to articulate the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). It is the latter [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that Etinson makes, illustrated in the [following](dictionary.md#follow) incisive point:

> Not all [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [wrongs](dictionary.md#wrong) convincingly register as [violations](dictionary.md#violation) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)…And this suggests that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is normatively special—that its [violation](dictionary.md#violation) [represents](dictionary.md#represent) a particular type of [wrong](dictionary.md#wrong). (2020: 357)
> 

Essentially, Etinson is [arguing](dictionary.md#argue) that (1) we should add to the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), that the [value](dictionary.md#value) or [status](dictionary.md#status) “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” picks out is in some [sense](dictionary.md#sense) “normatively [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive)”; and (2) in [order](dictionary.md#order) to articulate (positively) what makes it [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive), we must investigate (negatively) what it [means](dictionary.md#means) to [harm](dictionary.md#harm) it. Thus, for Etinson, [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) does not simply have the [normative](dictionary.md#normative) function to “set off” the special [status](dictionary.md#status) of [humans](dictionary.md#human) in our practical deliberations; it sets off [humans](dictionary.md#human) in a special way. And this “way” can only be understood through a consideration of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s fragility.

The second [reason](dictionary.md#reason) for underlining this [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [negative](dictionary.md#negative) [methodology](dictionary.md#methodology) comes from Killmister (2020), who also makes second-order [claims](dictionary.md#claim) about the proper method for theorizing [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). On her view, all the primary senses of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in the general schema can be [harmed](dictionary.md#harm) in some way or other. Each can be injured, lowered, embarrassed, humiliated, threatened, frustrated, even destroyed. Correspondingly, it is a criterion of any satisfactory [theory](dictionary.md#theory), that it explains the [nature](dictionary.md#nature) and [conditions](dictionary.md#condition) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s fragility in *all* its primary senses ([categories 1–4](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat1n4) in the general schema).

The emphasis on “all” is important. Killmister’s [theory](dictionary.md#theory) stands out for being an attempt to [use](dictionary.md#use) the criterion of fragility to offer a unified [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). And this raises a question beyond whether fragility is a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). Namely, for any given [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), does it purport to theorize [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in general, or *[human](dictionary.md#human)* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in particular? Most literature bearing the term “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” in its title [will](dictionary.md#will) say at some point that it is really or mostly about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). But if so, then are such [theories](dictionary.md#theory) in some [sense](dictionary.md#sense) incomplete? Must a complete [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of *[human](dictionary.md#human)* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) ([category 4](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat4) in the general schema) reconcile itself with the other primary senses of the term ([categories 1–3](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat1)), as Killmister implores?

The next section attempts to offer some footholds for answering these new questions. But there is one more point to make here, because it is pertinent to second-order questions about how to formulate [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). Part of what motivates Killmister’s effort at a unified [theory](dictionary.md#theory) is an attending [argument](dictionary.md#argument) that [theories](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) should fit with everyday ways of speaking about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). And everyday talk of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), she argues, often refers to the other primary senses of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in the general schema. Moreover, she [claims](dictionary.md#claim) that all these ways of talking are connected by the fragility criterion, as well as some of the other defining criteria we have discussed, especially (A) the idea of a [normative](dictionary.md#normative) function and (B) an essential connection to [respect](dictionary.md#respect). Finally, she [treats](dictionary.md#treat) this “fit” between her account of the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and everyday talk about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as important evidence for the correctness of her own criteria. Nor is she alone in staking evidentiary [value](dictionary.md#value) on [fitness](dictionary.md#fitness) to everyday language. For example, Bird (2013) and Etinson (2020) make similar [arguments](dictionary.md#argument).[[6](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-6)] Do we agree? Surely, a [good](dictionary.md#good) [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [will](dictionary.md#will) not run roughshod over everyday usage. Still, exactly how beholden should a [theory](dictionary.md#theory) be?

## 3. [Human Dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity): Touchstones of Analysis

The conclusion of the last section raised the [following](dictionary.md#follow) question about the conceptual landscape of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) research: Which of the many points being made are relevant to theorizing [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in general, and which pertain specifically to [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)? To answer this question, it [will](dictionary.md#will) help to distill a few enduring themes that characterize the debate over specifically [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). These are hardly all the themes that could be [identified](dictionary.md#identify). Also, because each theme has been introduced in one way or other already, the [following](dictionary.md#follow) is intentionally condensed, with the [understanding](dictionary.md#understand) that any of these leads could be [followed](dictionary.md#follow) into a forest of nuance.

### 3.1 [Virtue](dictionary.md#virtue), [Value](dictionary.md#value), [Status](dictionary.md#status), and the “distinctiveness” point reconsidered

One could take all the existing literature on [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) and arrange it into three groups, depending on whether any given [argument](dictionary.md#argument) renders [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as a [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) (i) [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue) or [quality](dictionary.md#quality) of character; (ii) [value](dictionary.md#value) or [worth](dictionary.md#worth); or (iii) [status](dictionary.md#status) or [standing](dictionary.md#standing). Our analysis already laid out the most important aspects in deciding between these classifications. We also noted that the trend in secular accounts is to articulate [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as a [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [status](dictionary.md#status) rather than as a [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue) or [value](dictionary.md#value). To this it should be added that [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue) accounts make up the minority of all [modern](dictionary.md#modern) [positions](dictionary.md#position), no doubt because most [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) [positions](dictionary.md#position) eschew the hierarchical drift that comes with tying [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue).

Perhaps less obvious in the literature, is the [agreement](dictionary.md#agreement) to articulate what is [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), regardless of which way it is rendered: [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue), [value](dictionary.md#value), or [status](dictionary.md#status). This “distinctiveness” point is pressing, given Etinson’s (2020) [argument](dictionary.md#argument) that a [negative](dictionary.md#negative) analysis of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s fragility is crucial to [understanding](dictionary.md#understand) what is “special” about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as a [normative](dictionary.md#normative) [concept](dictionary.md#concept). On his view, a [good](dictionary.md#good) [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [will](dictionary.md#will) pick out a “meaningful [distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) set of concerns” (2020: 354), if it is to [justify](dictionary.md#justify) [using](dictionary.md#use) the term at all. The force of this point extends beyond the question of whether fragility is a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). But to appreciate fully why, we need to contextualize it. So, consider the [following](dictionary.md#follow):

The idea that [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s are morally special or [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) has found expression in the religion, philosophy, literature, and [art](dictionary.md#art) of all societies, [modern](dictionary.md#modern) and ancient. And connected to that idea and those expressions is an enduring struggle to [understand](dictionary.md#understand) what this peculiar “[value](dictionary.md#value)” is. Since antiquity many have leveraged this idea about [human](dictionary.md#human) distinctiveness into the idea that [humans](dictionary.md#human) are *supremely* valuable. The chorus in Sophocles’ *Antigone* (c. 441 BCE), for example, lauds man as the most “wondrous” of all things in the world, a prodigy who cuts through the [natural](dictionary.md#natural) world the way a sailor cuts through the “perilous” surging seas that threaten to engulf him (verses 332 ff., cited in Debes 2009 at p. 52). Similarly, the Judeo-Christian [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) of *imago Dei* trumpets [human](dictionary.md#human) dominion over the earth and the [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [value](dictionary.md#value) of [humanity](dictionary.md#humanity). Excluding [God](dictionary.md#god) and [angels](dictionary.md#angel), the [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) implies that [humankind](dictionary.md#humankind) is preeminently valuable.

Admittedly, these are not [references](dictionary.md#reference) to [theory](dictionary.md#theory), strictly speaking. However, the historical development of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has long been tangled up with this [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) widespread attempt to explain [human](dictionary.md#human) distinctiveness, even if only implicitly or under cognate terms like “uniqueness” (e.g., Muray 2007 and Rolston 2008). Indeed, one might say that the most basic point of the *[concept](dictionary.md#concept)* of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), especially as it was molded into the category of “[human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)”, just is to describe the [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [virtue](dictionary.md#virtue), [value](dictionary.md#value), or [status](dictionary.md#status) of [humans](dictionary.md#human). From Cicero’s ancient [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the special [worth](dictionary.md#worth) of the “[human](dictionary.md#human) race”; to Schacter’s (1983) anti-Waldron [argument](dictionary.md#argument) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s importance outside of [legal](dictionary.md#legal) contexts highlights the need “to [treat](dictionary.md#treat) it as a [distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) [subject](dictionary.md#subject)” (1983: 854); to Iglesias’s (2001) attempt to explain our “distinctiveness” as [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s; to Kateb’s (2011) [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) involves the unique role [humans](dictionary.md#human) have as “stewards” of the earth—in all these [arguments](dictionary.md#argument) the distinctiveness point is in play. Or consider Simone Weil, writing in the shadow of World [War](dictionary.md#war) II, and who [inspired](dictionary.md#inspire) Iglesias:

> There is something sacred in every man, but it is not his [person](dictionary.md#person). Nor yet is it the [human](dictionary.md#human) personality. It is this man; no more nor less… The whole of him. The arms, the eyes, the thoughts, everything. Not without infinite scruple would I touch anything of this. (first published 1957 [1986: 50–51])
> 

Similarly, Malpas (2007) explicitly argues that insofar as we are investigating [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), it seems we are inquiring into what is distinctively valuable about “being” [human](dictionary.md#human), by which he [means](dictionary.md#means) something like the *experience* of being [human](dictionary.md#human).

This said, we must [understand](dictionary.md#understand) Etinson as [arguing](dictionary.md#argue) that it is not enough to [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that what explains the [moral](dictionary.md#moral) distinctiveness of [humans](dictionary.md#human) is their “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”. We have to say what about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) *itself* is [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive). And we must do so in a way that would substantiate (in part or in whole) the more general [claim](dictionary.md#claim) of [human](dictionary.md#human) distinctiveness. After all, Etinson argues, not all kinds of [harms](dictionary.md#harm) to [humans](dictionary.md#human) count as [harms](dictionary.md#harm) to their [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). Not even all [harms](dictionary.md#harm) to their [status](dictionary.md#status) are obviously [harms](dictionary.md#harm) to their [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). Slapping someone in the face is certainly an affront to their [status](dictionary.md#status) in some [sense](dictionary.md#sense), and perhaps even necessarily to their social-status [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) ([(3)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat3) in the general schema), but not necessarily to their *[human](dictionary.md#human)* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) ([(4)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#cat4) in the general schema). (See also, Valentini 2017.)

So, what is [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) itself? There is more than one way to answer this question. Etinson’s own suggestion, as we have seen, is to [use](dictionary.md#use) a [negative](dictionary.md#negative) [normative](dictionary.md#normative) lens to articulate what kinds of [harms](dictionary.md#harm) to [humans](dictionary.md#human) count distinctively as [harms](dictionary.md#harm) against their [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). But rather than tracing out further particular answers to this question, let us note a few final general observations about the distinctiveness point.

First, most theorists of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) do not explicitly parse out the need to explain the distinctiveness of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) itself, as [contrasted](dictionary.md#contrast) with [human](dictionary.md#human) distinctiveness in general. However, I submit that explaining the distinctiveness of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (itself) is often *part* of what many theorists take themselves to be doing, however indirectly. In other words, explaining [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s “[distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) set of concerns”, to [use](dictionary.md#use) Etinson’s phrase, seems to be [constitutive](dictionary.md#constitutive) of many [theories](dictionary.md#theory) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). There is no space to substantiate this contention here, but we risk losing valuable insights about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s distinctiveness if we don’t take this charitable approach.

Second, it is important not to run together the [normative](dictionary.md#normative) upshot of any [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the *[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)* of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), with a *definitional* point about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s distinctiveness. For example, if one thinks [humans](dictionary.md#human) have [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) their [rational](dictionary.md#rational) [agency](dictionary.md#agency), then in one [sense](dictionary.md#sense), this [will](dictionary.md#will) [entail](dictionary.md#entail) *a* [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) distinctiveness. For, it [will](dictionary.md#will) necessarily inform the substance of whatever [rights](dictionary.md#right) or [duties](dictionary.md#duty) we think [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) justifies. In other words, the content of such [rights](dictionary.md#right) and [duties](dictionary.md#duty) [will](dictionary.md#will) need to be “distinctively” tied to [rational](dictionary.md#rational) [agency](dictionary.md#agency), and what it [means](dictionary.md#means) to protect, [harm](dictionary.md#harm), or nurture this [agency](dictionary.md#agency). Likewise for any other candidate account of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground). Nevertheless, this is different than talking about distinctiveness as a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). Scholars like Etinson and Killmister are trying to articulate the [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [normative](dictionary.md#normative) function that *defines* [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), regardless of its [grounds](dictionary.md#ground)—indeed, which any satisfactory account of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) must be able to explain.

Finally, Debes (2009) adds the [following](dictionary.md#follow) qualification to the “distinctiveness” point:

> A proper account of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) must pick out a [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [value](dictionary.md#value) belonging to [humans](dictionary.md#human). This is not [equivalent](dictionary.md#equivalent) to [demanding](dictionary.md#demand) a [value](dictionary.md#value) that belongs distinctively to [humans](dictionary.md#human).
> 

The latter [demand](dictionary.md#demand) (which some theorists do insist on), not only arbitrarily rules out a shared space of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) between different entities but also risks ruling out the best options for [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground):

> For example, if [rationality](dictionary.md#rationality) should after all turn out to be the most defensible basis for a [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), we [[humans](dictionary.md#human)] wouldn’t want to yield it simply because we discovered that chimps and whales were [rational](dictionary.md#rational) or that Martians really have been trying to communicate with us for millennia. (2009: 61).
> 

### 3.2 [Individuals](dictionary.md#individual) vs. species

The conclusion of the last section brings to [mind](dictionary.md#mind) another theoretical dividing line in the literature, between those [arguing](dictionary.md#argue) for [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) *qua* [human](dictionary.md#human) [individual](dictionary.md#individual), and those [arguing](dictionary.md#argue) for [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) *qua* species. Which is it?

Some say, both. For example, Kateb (2011) argues that we must explain the uniqueness of [persons](dictionary.md#person) *and* the species: “I am what no one else is, while not existentially superior to anyone else; we [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s belong to a species that is what no other species is” (2011: 17). According to Kateb (echoing Cicero), [humans](dictionary.md#human) are partly divorced from the [natural](dictionary.md#natural) [order](dictionary.md#order) both individually and collectively, [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) possessing unparalleled and morally special [capacities](dictionary.md#capacity) for self-creation. Moreover, Kateb is clear that the distinctiveness of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) also [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) [human](dictionary.md#human) [normative](dictionary.md#normative) supremacy. Indeed, on his view, [human](dictionary.md#human) supremacy is one of the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity): “The core idea of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is that on earth, [humanity](dictionary.md#humanity) is the greatest type of being” (2011: 3–4); we are “the highest species on earth—so far” (2011: 17).

Of course, such [claims](dictionary.md#claim) are contentious. But if we want to engage them, it is important to be clear about whether we are doing so at the definitional level, or at the level of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)’s [grounds](dictionary.md#ground). For example, recall Cicero’s [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that it is [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) our [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [capacities](dictionary.md#capacity) for self-development “by study and [reflection](dictionary.md#reflection)”, that [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s have a “superior” “[nature](dictionary.md#nature)” to that of “cattle and other [animals](dictionary.md#animal)”. This Ciceronian idea about the [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) shares affinities with many other extant views, including Kant, Pico, and obviously Kateb. And we have considered [reasons](dictionary.md#reason) for rejecting this line of [argument](dictionary.md#argument). But even if one accepts it, the present point is that one might *not* endorse Kateb’s [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the “core idea” of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) being essentially about the [human](dictionary.md#human) species. That is, one could agree with Kateb about what [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) but disagree that part of what defines [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), is the [property](dictionary.md#property) of species superiority. Stern (1975) and Gaylin (1984), for example, agree that the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is most essentially about [human](dictionary.md#human) [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status), but [argue](dictionary.md#argue) that this does not [imply](dictionary.md#imply) that the [human](dictionary.md#human) *species* possesses [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). It only implies that each [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [human](dictionary.md#human) has [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity).

Finally, any [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the species or [collective](dictionary.md#collective) [humanity](dictionary.md#humanity) must confront worries about [speciesism](dictionary.md#speciesism), and in turn all the objections of those who think that non-human [animals](dictionary.md#animal) have a purchase on the [normative](dictionary.md#normative) space of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (see, e.g., Rachels 1990; Pluhar 1995; LaFollette & Shanks 1996; Bekoff 1998; Meyer 2001; Rolston 2008; Singer 2009; and especially Gruen 2003 [2010], who explores the idea of “wild [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”.)

### 3.3 [Inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) vs. constructed

It is common to talk of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) as “[inherent](dictionary.md#inherent)”. What this [means](dictionary.md#means), however, is often unclear. Sometimes it is redescribed to mean “[intrinsic](dictionary.md#intrinsic)”, other times “[inalienable](dictionary.md#inalienable)”. It is also often conjoined with [claims](dictionary.md#claim) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is “[inviolable](dictionary.md#inviolable)”—although this is dubious if inviolability is supposed to be *[entailed](dictionary.md#entail)* by inherentness. After all, one might agree that [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) cannot be entirely destroyed because [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent), but nevertheless allow that [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) can be [harmed](dictionary.md#harm), insulted, frustrated, and humiliated.

This is not to suggest that all that is [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) is indestructible. Whether [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) can really be destroyed depends entirely on why one thinks [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent). If one thinks that [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) because we have [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) possessing a [soul](dictionary.md#soul), then they probably do not think [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) can be truly destroyed (although they may think it can be degraded; or even, if they subscribe to Christian dogma, that it was in fact degraded by the “fall” from grace). On the other hand, if one thinks that [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) because we have [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [in virtue of](dictionary.md#in%20virtue%20of) our [capacities](dictionary.md#capacity) for [rational](dictionary.md#rational) [agency](dictionary.md#agency), then they probably do think [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) can be lost or destroyed, whether by extreme psychological trauma or a sharp blow to the head.

It must also be reiterated that secular theorists of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) have increasingly turned away from “inherentness” as a defining [property](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (see, e.g., Darwall 2006; Debes 2009; Kateb 2011; Rosen 2012a; Waldron 2012; Valentini 2017; Killmister 2020). The [reasons](dictionary.md#reason) for doing so vary. Most reflect suspicion about the metaphysical baggage, especially of the theological kind, that historically has gone hand in hand with inherentness [claims](dictionary.md#claim). But there are often other [reasons](dictionary.md#reason). For example, for those that think [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is defined by the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) or [standing](dictionary.md#standing) to hold others [responsible](dictionary.md#responsible) with second-personal [claims](dictionary.md#claim), [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) only comes into existence within actual second-personal encounters (see, e.g., Meyer 1989, Darwall 2006, Forst 2011, and perhaps Feinberg 1970 [1980]). Or recall Valentini, who argues that the problem with the metaphysical [claims](dictionary.md#claim) needed to back up inherentness is not simply that they are “heavy”, but that they distract us from the core political function of [rights](dictionary.md#right). Meanwhile, for those committed to a [negative](dictionary.md#negative) [methodology](dictionary.md#methodology), like Killmister or Etinson, the starting [assumption](dictionary.md#assumption) is that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) *can* be destroyed. And while this does not [entail](dictionary.md#entail) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is not [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent), Killmister persuasively argues that such fragility strongly tells against inherentness.

All this raises the question: If not [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent), then what? The simple answer is that on many [theories](dictionary.md#theory) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is socially constructed. Of course, there are many [theories](dictionary.md#theory) about what it [means](dictionary.md#means) for something to be socially constructed, with many important differences between them. There is, for example, a chasm of difference between [claiming](dictionary.md#claim) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is constructed as a [constitutive](dictionary.md#constitutive) part of second-personal relationships (*à la* Darwall or Forst) and [claiming](dictionary.md#claim) that it is constructed through the transformation of an old idea about “[elevated](dictionary.md#elevate) [rank](dictionary.md#rank)” (*à la* Appiah or Waldron). So, the simple answer must be turned into a complicated one, which we cannot do here.

### 3.4 [Respect](dictionary.md#respect): An alternative lens on [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)

A complete [theory](dictionary.md#theory) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) must articulate the [demands](dictionary.md#demand) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) places on us, morally and politically. Some [theories](dictionary.md#theory), as we have seen, build this expectation into the defining [properties](dictionary.md#property) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). But even when they do not, there is almost always some appeal, [positive](dictionary.md#positive) or [negative](dictionary.md#negative), to some [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about what it [means](dictionary.md#means) to [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), and most often to some [claim](dictionary.md#claim) about *[respect](dictionary.md#respect)*—which, furthermore, is usually claimed to be both what [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) [demands](dictionary.md#demand) and what it [means](dictionary.md#means) to [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). The [subject](dictionary.md#subject) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect), however, is its own labyrinth. It boasts an array of [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning), diverse applications, and extensive commentary. This said, two very general points about [respect](dictionary.md#respect) stand out in connection to [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity).

First, the connection between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [respect](dictionary.md#respect) has been made concrete in various political contexts. For example, Schachter (1983) notes that Article 10 of the *International Covenant on Civil and Political [Rights](dictionary.md#right)* provides that,

> all [persons](dictionary.md#person) deprived of their [liberty](dictionary.md#liberty) shall be [treated](dictionary.md#treat) with [humanity](dictionary.md#humanity) and with [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for the [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) [person](dictionary.md#person). (1983: 848)
> 

He marks a similar provision in Article 5 of the *American [Convention](dictionary.md#convention) on [Human Rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights)* (Ibid). And this connection generates [distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) challenges in the political context that reach beyond the [human rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights) discourse. Schachter explains:

> In the political context, [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [worth](dictionary.md#worth) of all [persons](dictionary.md#person), and for their [individual](dictionary.md#individual) choices, leads, broadly speaking, to a strong emphasis on the [will](dictionary.md#will) and consent of the governed. It [means](dictionary.md#means) that the coercive rule of one or the few over the many is [incompatible](dictionary.md#incompatible) with a due [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of the [person](dictionary.md#person). (1983: 850)
> 

However, Schachter further points out, many political [theories](dictionary.md#theory) contend,

> that substantial [equality](dictionary.md#equality) is a [necessary](dictionary.md#necessary) [condition](dictionary.md#condition) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for the [intrinsic](dictionary.md#intrinsic) [worth](dictionary.md#worth) of the [human](dictionary.md#human) [person](dictionary.md#person)…In particular, relations of dominance and subordination would be viewed as antithetical to the basic [ideal](dictionary.md#ideal) [of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)]. If this is so, great discrepancies in wealth and power need to be eliminated to avoid such relations. (ibid)
> 

The question thus becomes, how can we achieve such egalitarian objectives, without the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) “excessive curtailment of [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [liberty](dictionary.md#liberty) and the [use](dictionary.md#use) of coercion” that [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) is *also* thought to eschew (1983: 850)? This question figures into some of history’s most influential political [theories](dictionary.md#theory), from Hegel to Rawls. (For an inroad to [understanding](dictionary.md#understand) the Hegelian line, see Honneth 2007; for the Rawlsian line, see Bird 2021.)

Second, as already hinted, the introduction of [respect](dictionary.md#respect) raises its own [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) challenge, namely, to explain what [respect](dictionary.md#respect) is. To do this, many theorists appeal, explicitly or implicitly, to what we earlier called “[recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) [respect](dictionary.md#respect)”. When we make plans or choose to [act](dictionary.md#act), we recognize-respect others when we appropriately take account of some fact about them, by adapting, revising, or even foregoing our plans and choices in the light of that fact. So, which “fact”? Well, if we are talking about [respecting](dictionary.md#respect) [persons](dictionary.md#person) *as* [persons](dictionary.md#person), in a [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [sense](dictionary.md#sense), many theorists have answered that *[human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)* is the operative fact. Or, if they drill down further, then whatever they [end](dictionary.md#end) up defending as the *[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)* of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity)—whether [rational](dictionary.md#rational) [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy), species [membership](dictionary.md#membership), an immortal [soul](dictionary.md#soul), etc.—is the relevant fact.[[7](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/notes.html#note-7)]

However, the last few decades have witnessed a wave of new theorizing about [respect](dictionary.md#respect). And this has consequences for theorizing about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). The most notable consequence stems from the field of [care ethics](dictionary.md#care%20ethics), where empathy, [compassion](dictionary.md#compassion), and caring have been conceived as [distinct](dictionary.md#distinct) kinds of [respect](dictionary.md#respect). Thus, although [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) did not figure explicitly into early [formulations](dictionary.md#formulation) of [care ethics](dictionary.md#care%20ethics), as conceived by those like Noddings (1984) or Held (2006), [care ethics](dictionary.md#care%20ethics) has increasingly been developed in ways that does bring [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to the fore, e.g., by those like Dillon (1992), Kittay (2005 and 2011), and Miller (2012). Dillon, in particular, gives voice to a profound alternative to rationalist [paradigms](dictionary.md#paradigm) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), noted frequently in this entry, and associated especially with Kant. She writes:

> [Care [respect](dictionary.md#respect)] [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for [persons](dictionary.md#person) in something which, considered in the abstract, nearly all [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s have and can be said to have equally - the characteristic of being an [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [human](dictionary.md#human) “me” - a characteristic which each of us [values](dictionary.md#value) and thinks is both morally important and profoundly morally [problematic](dictionary.md#problematic) not only in others but in ourselves as well, and which pulls our [attention](dictionary.md#attention) to the concrete particularities of each [human](dictionary.md#human) [individual](dictionary.md#individual). We are, on the care [respect](dictionary.md#respect) approach, to pay [attention](dictionary.md#attention) not only to the fact that someone is a “me” but also to which particular “me” she is. (Dillon 1992: 118)
> 

The core idea Dillon expresses here about the [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) *qua* the concrete “particularity” of an [individual](dictionary.md#individual) [person](dictionary.md#person) (as she puts it on 1992: 115), traces to Iris Murdoch (1970) and Elizabeth Spelman (1978). It also resonates with the thinking of Simon Weil, noted above in [§3.2](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#IndiVsSpec). More generally, Dillon’s [argument](dictionary.md#argument) illustrates how taking the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect) as our starting point might lead to very different views about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity).

## 4. Skeptical Worries

The conceptual complexity surrounding [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has sparked a long history of disagreement about the [utility](dictionary.md#utility) of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept), with some concluding that it is hopelessly messy or essentially [ambiguous](dictionary.md#ambiguous). One of the more cited versions comes from the Yale bioethicist Ruth Macklin, who made this complaint in a widely read 2003 editorial. “[Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”, she asserted, “is a useless [concept](dictionary.md#concept). It [means](dictionary.md#means) no more than [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for [persons](dictionary.md#person) or their [autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy)” (2003: 1419).

Macklin’s [claim](dictionary.md#claim) was not backed by much [argument](dictionary.md#argument). And judging by the literature, her complaint did nothing to slow down the application of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) in [bioethics](dictionary.md#bioethics), where it is now discussed in the context of everything from disability studies, elderly care, [human](dictionary.md#human) research, [cloning](dictionary.md#cloning), “[chimeras](dictionary.md#chimera)”, [enhancement](dictionary.md#enhancement), transhumanism, and [euthanasia](dictionary.md#euthanasia) (see the bibliography for leads to each of these). Still, one does not have to look hard to find Macklin’s allies.

For example, Rosen (2012a) [claims](dictionary.md#claim) that “animus against [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is widely shared among philosophers, in my experience, and goes back a long way” (2012a: 143). He buttresses his [claim](dictionary.md#claim) by recounting the encouragement of a colleague to give the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) “a [good](dictionary.md#good) kicking”, and by quoting his favorite historical challenges by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, the former of whom called [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), “the shibboleth of all the perplexed and empty-headed moralists” (1840 [1965: 100] cited in Rosen 2013: 143). Importantly, however, for Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, the problem wasn’t simply the ambiguity of the [concept](dictionary.md#concept). They thought that the [moralized](dictionary.md#moralize) [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [inherent](dictionary.md#inherent) or [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [human](dictionary.md#human) [worth](dictionary.md#worth) garners widespread credence only because it flatters our [pride](dictionary.md#pride) and allows us to slip into self-deceptive [moral](dictionary.md#moral) complacency. This deflationary hypothesis strikes at the heart of our [modern](dictionary.md#modern) [dignitarian](dictionary.md#dignitarian) [ethos](dictionary.md#ethos).

So, exactly how widespread is skepticism of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)? There is no simple answer to this question because it depends greatly on what one takes [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to be. Even defenders of one [conception](dictionary.md#conception) of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) often express skepticism about other [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception). For example, we already noted the trend away from thick metaphysical [claims](dictionary.md#claim) about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), which make [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) depend on anything like a divinely implanted “[soul](dictionary.md#soul)” or Kant’s “noumenal” idea of the self. Rosen calls such views, “[internal](dictionary.md#internal) kernel” [theories](dictionary.md#theory), and further notes that reservations about these views are often both metaphysical (no such thing exists) and epistemological (we cannot [justify](dictionary.md#justify) our [belief](dictionary.md#belief) in such things). The present point, however, is that if one’s skepticism about [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity) in general turns on the specific reservation about [internal](dictionary.md#internal) kernel [theories](dictionary.md#theory), then one should stay open [minded](dictionary.md#mind). For, as we have seen, there are many alternatives for theorizing [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) that do not depend on such metaphysical commitments.

Still, because there is more than one way to interpret Schopenhauer’s [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is a “shibboleth”, it may prove helpful to trace out a little further a few possible skeptical lines of [argument](dictionary.md#argument), albeit briefly. So, here are four ways skepticism tends to play out in the existing literature:

1. Rosen suggests that Schopenhauer’s main complaint is that “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” is an impressive “façade” [obscuring](dictionary.md#obscure) the harsh reality behind the idea, namely, that the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) lacks the substance to do the work we assign to it. More exactly, [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) cannot serve as a [foundation](dictionary.md#foundation) for [morality](dictionary.md#morality), including, serving as the [normative](dictionary.md#normative) basis of [rights](dictionary.md#right) (Rosen 2012a: 143). We encountered this line of thinking already in the earlier discussion of the connection between [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right). Essentially, the complaint is that no extant account of the *[grounds](dictionary.md#ground)* of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) (e.g., Kantian rationalist [arguments](dictionary.md#argument), Judeo-Christian *imago Dei* [arguments](dictionary.md#argument), etc.) can satisfactorily explain and [justify](dictionary.md#justify) the [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) [normative](dictionary.md#normative) work [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is supposed to do. See especially, Sangiovanni 2017, who rejects Aristotelian, Kantian, and *imago Dei* accounts of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) as insufficient for the tasks [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is typically set to, including [grounding](dictionary.md#ground) [rights](dictionary.md#right).
2. A related but distinctively different way of taking Schopenhauer’s objection, is the worry that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has been *politically* manipulated to capitalize on its deceptive potential. As Rosen notes, the general point here is not new. “The idea that illusions are essential to the political [order](dictionary.md#order)”, he writes, “runs through the Western tradition of political thought from Plato” (2012a: 144). However, Rosen suggests that Nietzsche gets the credit for [understanding](dictionary.md#understand) how powerful an illusion [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity), specifically, can be, for such political purpose. “Such phantoms as the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of man”, Nietzsche writes,
    
    > are the needy products of slavedom hiding itself from itself. Woeful time, in which the slave requires such [conceptions](dictionary.md#conception), in which he is incited to think about and beyond himself! (from “The Greek State”, 1871; quoted in Rosen 2012a: 144)
    > 
    
    In fact, this skeptical line goes back further than Rosen seems to appreciate. Thus, in his 1714, *Fable of the Bees*, Bernard Mandeville essentially made the same [argument](dictionary.md#argument). Speaking conjecturally about the origins of [morality](dictionary.md#morality), Mandeville writes:
    
    > Making [use](dictionary.md#use) of this bewitching Engine [of flattery], [the Politicians] extoll’d the excellency of our [Nature](dictionary.md#nature) above other [Animals](dictionary.md#animal)…Which being done, they laid before them how unbecoming it was the [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of such sublime [Creatures](dictionary.md#creature) to be solicitous about gratifying those Appetites, which they had in common with Brutes, and at the same time unmindful of those higher [Qualities](dictionary.md#quality) that gave them the preeminence over all visible Beings. (1714 [1988: 43])
    > 
3. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is vacuous. Bracketing any worries about how any given political institution manipulates the idea of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to achieve its [ends](dictionary.md#end), or how [human](dictionary.md#human) [pride](dictionary.md#pride) might capitalize on the idea of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) to facilitate self-deception about our personal [moral](dictionary.md#moral) failings, perhaps the idea of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is simply unnecessary. For example, consider the first sentence of Article One of the *[Universal Declaration of [Human Rights](dictionary.md#human%20rights)](dictionary.md#universal%20declaration%20of%20human%20rights)*: “All [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s are born [free](dictionary.md#free) and [equal](dictionary.md#equal) in [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) and [rights](dictionary.md#right)”. What would be lost, Rosen asks, “if one were just to say, ‘All [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being)s are born [free](dictionary.md#free) and [equal](dictionary.md#equal) in [rights](dictionary.md#right)’?” (2012a: 149). A slightly different version of this complaint is that, because of its vacuousness, [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has become mere dogma. For example, in the [legal](dictionary.md#legal) context, Theoder Heuss, called [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) a “non-interpreted [thesis](dictionary.md#thesis)” in [law](dictionary.md#law). And Costas Douzinas [argued](dictionary.md#argue) [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) was an empty placeholder in a “hegemonic battle” of competing [legal](dictionary.md#legal) ideologies (see also, McCrudden 2013a for some analysis of both; also, Bargaric & Allan 2006).
4. [Dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is [ambiguous](dictionary.md#ambiguous). The thrust of this frequent complaint is that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) has become a useless [concept](dictionary.md#concept), not so much because it is empty, but because it has too many [meanings](dictionary.md#meaning). (A few have even claimed that the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) is “essentially” [ambiguous](dictionary.md#ambiguous), though it is not clear what this is supposed to mean; see, e.g., Shultziner 2007 or Rotenstreich 1983.) When focused, this worry comes in three [forms](dictionary.md#form):
    1. the ambiguity of [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) makes “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” incomprehensible;
    2. the ambiguity of [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) makes “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)” susceptible to abuse;
    3. the ambiguity of [meaning](dictionary.md#meaning) conceals objectionable [subjective](dictionary.md#subjective) opinion or [substantive](dictionary.md#substantive) baggage in the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of “[dignity](dictionary.md#dignity)”.

Examples of all these [positions](dictionary.md#position) can easily be found. But perhaps the best illustrations once again come from the [legal](dictionary.md#legal) context. Regarding [(1)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#way1): see, e.g., Bates (2005), who acknowledges the problem but then tries to defend [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity). Regarding [(2)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#way2): see, e.g., Gearty (2014) and Moyn (2013), who [argue](dictionary.md#argue) that the continuing ambiguity of [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) make it too easily abused in courtroom deliberation and democratic [theories](dictionary.md#theory) of [rights](dictionary.md#right). Regarding [(3)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dignity/#way3): see Pinker (2008), who argues that [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) is a [subjective](dictionary.md#subjective) phenomenon, “[relative](dictionary.md#relative), [fungible](dictionary.md#fungible), and often harmful”; also Rosen (2012a) and Moyn (2013), both of whom [argue](dictionary.md#argue) that our [modern](dictionary.md#modern) [concept](dictionary.md#concept) [labors](dictionary.md#labor) under underappreciated debts to Christian theology;

These are not all the possible [reasons](dictionary.md#reason) for skepticism about [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity), only the most prevalent. And each is usually sharpened in various ways that make the [argument](dictionary.md#argument) cut deeper than what this summary suggests. This said, the [merits](dictionary.md#merit) of these critiques are disputable. Indeed, much of the foregoing analysis in this entry suggests strategies of response to each.

But perhaps the most fitting way to conclude is with a different [kind of](dictionary.md#kind%20of) question entirely. Namely, how *[ought](dictionary.md#ought)* we respond to such skeptical attacks, if at all? Thus, it is hard not to think of Frederick Douglass’s warning, [delivered](dictionary.md#deliver) in his 1852 “Fourth of July” [speech](dictionary.md#speech), about the dangers of [demanding](dictionary.md#demand) of anyone, that they *[argue](dictionary.md#argue)* for their [equal](dictionary.md#equal) and basic [human](dictionary.md#human) [worth](dictionary.md#worth) or [status](dictionary.md#status)—especially when so many [people](dictionary.md#people) remain not simply oppressed, but exposed to vitriolic hate in a world that constantly proclaims its faith and commitment in the [ideal](dictionary.md#ideal) of [human dignity](dictionary.md#human%20dignity). “At a time like this”, Douglass said, “scorching irony, not convincing [argument](dictionary.md#argument), is needed” (1852: 20).

## Bibliography

- Addis, Adeno, 2013, “The Role of Human Dignity in a World of Plural Values and Ethical Commitments”, *Netherlands Quarterly of Human Rights*, 31(4): 403–444. doi:10.1177/016934411303100403
- Ammicht-Quinn, Regina, Maureen Junker-Kenny, and Elsa Tamez (eds), 2003, *The Discourse of Human Dignity*, (Concilium 2003/2), London: SCM Press.
- Annas, George J., 2004, “American Bioethics and Human Rights: The End of All Our Exploring”, *Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics*, 32(4): 658–663. doi:10.1111/j.1748-720X.2004.tb01970.x
- Appiah, Anthony, 2010, *The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen*, New York: W.W. Norton.
- Bagaric, Mirko and James Allan, 2006, “The Vacuous Concept of Dignity”, *Journal of Human Rights*, 5(2): 257–270. doi:10.1080/14754830600653603
- Barak, Aharon, 2015, *Human Dignity: The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right*, Daniel Kayros (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781316106327
- Bates, Justin, 2005, “Human Dignity — An Empty Phrase in Search of Meaning?”, *Judicial Review*, 10(2): 165–168. doi:10.1080/10854681.2005.11426430
- Bayer, Oswald, 2014, “Martin Luther’s Conception of Human Dignity,” in Düwell et. al. 2014: 101–107.
- Beattie, Tina, 2013, “The Vanishing Absolute and the Deconsecrated God: A Theological Reflection on Revelation, Law, and Human Dignity”, in McCrudden 2013b: 259–274 (ch. 14).
- Beiser, Frederick C., 1992, “Kant’s Intellectual Development: 1746–1781”, in *The Cambridge Companion to Kant*, Paul Guyer (ed.), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 26–61. doi:10.1017/CCOL0521365872.002
- Beitz, Charles R., 2013, “Human Dignity in the Theory of Human Rights: Nothing But a Phrase?: Human Dignity in the Theory of Human Rights: Nothing But a Phrase?”, *Philosophy and Public Affairs*, 41(3): 259–290. doi:10.1111/papa.12017
- Bekoff, Marc, 1998, “Resisting Speciesism and Expanding the Community of Equals”, *BioScience*, 48(8): 638–641. doi:10.2307/1313423
- Bird, Colin, 2013, “Dignity as a Moral Concept”, *Social Philosophy and Policy*, 30(1-2): 150–176.
- –––, 2021, *Human Dignity and Political Criticism*, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108937597
- Birnbacher, Dieter, 2005, “Human Cloning and Human Dignity”, *Reproductive BioMedicine Online*, 10(sup 1): 50–55. doi:10.1016/S1472-6483(10)62206-7
- Bostrom, Nick, 2005, “In Defense of Posthuman Dignity”, *Bioethics*, 19(3): 202–214. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8519.2005.00437.x
- –––, 2008, “Dignity and Enhancement”, in President’s Council on Bioethics 2008: 173–206 (ch. 8). [[Bostrom 2008 available online](https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/human_dignity/chapter8.html)]
- Boxill, Bernard, 2017, “Sympathy and Dignity in Early Africana Philosophy”, in Debes 2017a: 333–359 (ch. 11).
- Braarvig, Jens, 2014a, “Buddhism: Inner Dignity and Absolute Altruism”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 170–176 (ch. 16). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.020
- –––, 2014b, “Hinduism: The Universal Self in a Class Society”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 163–169 (ch. 15). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.019
- Brady, Veronica, 2007, “The Question of Dignity: Doubts and Loves and a Whisper from Where the Ruined House Once Stood”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 119–126. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_10
- Buchanan, Allen E., 2009, “Moral Status and Human Enhancement”, *Philosophy and Public Affairs*, 37(4): 346–381. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.2009.01166.x
- –––, 2011, *Beyond Humanity? The Ethics of Biomedical Enhancement*, (Uehiro Series in Practical Ethics), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199587810.001.0001
- Burns, Lawrence, 2008, “What Is the Scope for the Interpretation of Dignity in Research Involving Human Subjects?”, *Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy*, 11(2): 191–208. doi:10.1007/s11019-007-9107-x
- Burrow, Rufus, Jr., 2006, *God and Human Dignity: The Personalism, Theology, and Ethics of Martin Luther King, Jr.*, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
- Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada [TCPS], 2014, “Tri-Council Policy Statement 2: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans”. [[TCPS 2014 available online](https://www.mcgill.ca/skillsets/files/skillsets/tcps2updated_workshop4.pdf)]
- Cancik, Hubert, 2002, “‘Dignity of Man’ and ‘*Persona*’ in Stoic Anthropology: Some Remarks on Cicero, *De Officiis* I, 105–107”, in *The Concept of Human Dignity in Human Rights Discourse,* David Kretzmer and Eckart Klein (eds), The Hauge: Kluwer Law International, 19–39. doi:0.1163/9789004478190_003
- Carozza, Paolo, 2008, “Human Dignity and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights: A Reply”, *European Journal of International Law*, 19(5): 931–944. doi:10.1093/ejil/chn059
- –––, 2013, “Human Rights, Human Dignity, and Human Experience”, in McCrudden 2013: 615–630 (ch. 37).
- Caulfield, Timothy and Roger Brownsword, 2006, “Human Dignity: A Guide to Policy Making in the Biotechnology Era?”, *Nature Reviews Genetics*, 7(1): 72–76. doi:10.1038/nrg1744
- Clark, Gillian and Tessa Rajak (eds), 2002, *Philosophy and Power in the Graeco-Roman World: Essays in Honour of Miriam Griffin*, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198299905.001.0001
- Copenhaver, Brian, 2017, “Dignity, Vile Bodies, and Nakedness: Giovanni Pivo and Giannozzo Manetti”, in Debes 2017a: 127–173 (ch. 5).
- Dalton, James S., 1999, “Human Dignity, Human Rights, and Ecology: Christian, Buddhist, and Native American Perspectives”, in *Made in God’s Image: The Catholic Vision of Human Dignity*, Regis Duffy and Angelus Gambatese (eds), New York/Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 29–54.
- Dan-Cohen, Meir, 2012, “Introduction”, in Waldron 2012: 3–13.
- Darwall, Stephen L., 1977, “Two Kinds of Respect”, *Ethics*, 88(1): 36–49. doi:10.1086/292054
- –––, 1999, “Sympathetic Liberalism: Recent Work on Adam Smith”, *Philosophy & Public Affairs*, 28(2): 139–164. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.1999.00139.x
- –––, 2006, *The Second-Person Standpoint: Morality, Respect and Accountability*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- –––, 2012, “Pufendorf on Morality, Sociability, and Moral Powers”, *Journal of the History of Philosophy*, 50(2): 213–238. doi:10.1353/hph.2012.0024
- –––, 2013, “Respect as Honor and as Accountability”, in his *Honor, History, and Relationship: Essays in Second-Personal Ethics II*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 11–29. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199662609.003.0002
- –––, 2017, “Equal Dignity and Rights”, in Debes 2017a: 181–201 (ch. 6).
- De Melo-Martín, Inmaculada, 2008, “Chimeras and Human Dignity”, *Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal*, 18(4): 331–346. doi:10.1353/ken.0.0268
- –––, 2010, “Human Dignity, Transhuman Dignity, and All That Jazz”, *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 10(7): 53–55. doi:10.1080/15265161003686530
- Debes, Remy, 2009, “Dignity’s Gauntlet”, *Philosophical Perspectives*, 23: 45–78. doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2009.00161.x
- –––, 2012, “Adam Smith on Dignity and Equality”, *British Journal for the History of Philosophy*, 20(1): 109–140. doi:10.1080/09608788.2011.651315
- ––– (ed.), 2017a, *Dignity: A History*, (Oxford Philosophical Concepts), New York, NY: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199385997.001.0001
- –––, Debes, Remy, 2017b, “Introduction”, in Debes 2017a: 1–19. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199385997.003.0001
- –––, 2017c, “Human Dignity Before Kant: Denis Diderot’s Passionate Person”, in Debes 2017a: 203–235 (ch. 7).
- –––, 2017d, “The Authority of Empathy (Or, How to Ground Sentimentalism)”, in *Ethical Sentimentalism: New Perspectives*, Remy Debes and Karsten Stueber (eds), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 153–170 (ch. 9). doi:10.1017/9781316105672.010
- –––, 2021, “Respect: A History”, in *Respect: Philosophical Essays*, Richard Dean and Oliver Sensen (eds), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 1–28.
- DeGrazia, David, 2007, “Human-Animal Chimeras: Human Dignity, Moral Status, and Species Prejudice”, *Metaphilosophy*, 38(2–3): 309–329. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2007.00476.x
- Dillon, Robin S., 1992, “Respect And Care: Toward Moral Integration 1”, *Canadian Journal of Philosophy*, 22(1): 105–131. doi:10.1080/00455091.1992.10717273
- Dimock, Wai Chee, 2012, “High and Low”, in Waldron 2012: 119–128. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.003.0006
- Donnelly, Jack, 1982, “Human Rights and Human Dignity: An Analytic Critique of Non-Western Conceptions of Human Rights”, *American Political Science Review*, 76(2): 303–316. doi:10.2307/1961111
- Douglas, Thomas, 2013, “Human Enhancement and Supra-Personal Moral Status”, *Philosophical Studies*, 162(3): 473–497. doi:10.1007/s11098-011-9778-2
- Douglass, Frederick, 1852, *Oration: Delivered in Corinthian Hall, Rochester*, Rochester, NY: Lee, Mann, & Co.
- Duncan, Craig, 2005, “Democratic Liberalism: The Politics of Dignity”, in *Libertarianism: For and Against*, Craig Duncan and Tibor Machan (eds), Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 79–126.
- Dürig, Günter, 1952, “Die Menschenauffassung des Grundgesetzes”, *Juristische Rundschau*, 1952(7): 259–263. doi:10.1515/juru.1952.1952.7.259
- Dussel, Enrique, 2003, “Dignity: Its Denial and Recognition on a Specific Context of Liberation”, in *The Discourse of Human Dignity*, Regina Ammicht-Quinn, Maureeen Junker-Kenny and Elsa Tamez (eds.), London: SCM Press, 93–104.
- Düwell, Marcus, 2014, “Human Dignity: Concepts, Discussions, Philosophical Perspectives”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 23–49. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.004
- Düwell, Marcus, Jens Braarvig, Roger Brownsword, Dietmar Mieth, Naomi van Steenbergen, and Dascha Düring (eds), 2014, *The Cambridge Handbook of Human Dignity: Interdisciplinary Perspectives*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033
- Dworkin, Ronald, 1977, *Taking Rights Seriously*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Eberle, Edward J., 2002, *Dignity and Liberty: Constitutional Visions in the Germany and the United States*, Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
- Edel, Abraham, 1969, “Humanist Ethics and the Meaning of Human Dignity”, in *Moral Problems in Contemporary Society: Essays in Humanistic Ethics*, Paul Kurtz (ed.), Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, pp. 227–240.
- Englard, Izhak, 2000, “Human Dignity: From Antiquity to Modern Israel’s Constitutional Framework,” *Cardozo Law Review*. 21: 1903–1927.
- Egonsson, Dan, 1998, *Dimensions of Dignity: The Moral Importance of Being Human*, Dordrecht: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-4974-7
- Etinson, Adam, 2020, “What’s So Special About Human Dignity?”, *Philosophy & Public Affairs*, 48(4): 353–381. doi:10.1111/papa.12175
- Fanon, Frantz, 1967, *Black Skin: White Mask*, Charles Markmann (trans.), New York, Grove Weidenfeld.
- ––– , 1963 [2004], *The Wretched of the Earth*, Richard Philcox (trans.), New York: Grove Press.
- Feinberg, Joel, 1970 [1980], “The Nature and Value of Rights”, *The Journal of Value Inquiry*, 4(4): 243–260. Reprinted in his *Rights, Justice, and the Bounds of Liberty*, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1980, 143–159. doi:10.1007/BF00137935
- FitzPatrick, William J., 2013, “Worth/Dignity”, in *International Encyclopedia of Ethics*, Hugh LaFollette (ed.), Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 5546–5553. doi:10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee205
- Fleischacker, Samuel, 2019, *Being Me Being You: Adam Smith and Empathy*, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Forst, Rainer, 2011, “The Ground of Critique: On the Concept of Human Dignity in Social Orders of Justification”, *Philosophy and Social Criticism*, 37(9): 965–976. doi:10.1177/0191453711416082
- Frick, Marie-Luisa, 2021, “Dehumanization and Human Rights”, in *The Routledge Hadbook of Dehumanization*, Maria Fronfeldner (ed.), London and New York: Routledge, 187–200.
- Friedman, Marilyn, 2013, “Care Ethics”, in Hugh LaFollette (ed.) *The International Encyclopedia of Ethics*, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 705–713. doi:10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee057
- Gaylin, Willard, 1984, “In Defense of the Dignity of the Human Being”, *The Hastings Center Report*, 14(4): 18–22. doi:10.2307/3561161
- Gearty, Conor, 2014, “The State of Human Rights”, *Global Policy*, 5(4): 391–400. doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12159
- Gewirth, Alan, 1992, “Human Dignity as the Basis of Rights”, in Meyer and Parent 1992: 10–28.
- Gooding-Williams, Robert, 2018, “The Du Bois–Washington Debate and the Idea of Dignity”, in *To Shape a New World: Essays on the Political Philosophy of Martin Luther King Jr.*, Tommie Shelby and Brandon M. Terry (eds), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 19–34. doi:10.4159/9780674919860-002
- Goos, Christoph, “*Würde des Menschen*: Restoring Human Dignity in Post-Nazi Germany”, in McCrudden 2013b: 79–94 (ch. 3).
- Gotesky, Rubin, and Ervin Laszlo (eds), 1970, *Human Dignity: This Century and the Next*, New York: Gordon and Breach.
- Gross, Myra, 1993, “Dignity: The Keystone of Alzheimer’s Care”, *Nursing Homes: Long Term Care Management*, 42(7): 8.
- Griffin, James, 2008, *On Human Rights*, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199238781.001.0001
- Griffin, Miriam, 2017, “Dignity in Roman and Stoic Thought”, in Debes 2017a: 47–65 (ch. 2).
- Gruen, Lori, 2003 [2010], “The Moral Status of Animals”, *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Fall 2010 edition), in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entries/moral-animal/>.
- Hanley, Ryan Patrick, 2017, “Rethinking Kant’s Debts to Rousseau”, *Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie*, 99(4): 380–404. doi:10.1515/agph-2017-0019
- Hanvey, James, 2013, “Dignity, Person, and *Imago Trinitatis*”, in McCrudden 2013b: 209–228 (ch. 11).
- Harris, George W., 1997, *Dignity and Vulnerability: Strength and Quality of Character*, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Haslam, Nick, 2014, “What Is Dehumanization?”, in *Humanness and Dehumanization*, Paul G. Bain, Jeroen Vaes, and Jacques-Philippe Leyens (eds), New York and Hove: Psychology Press, 34–48 (ch. 3).
- Healy, Mike and Wilkowska, Iwona, 2017, “Marx, Alientation and the Denial of Dignity of Work”, in *Dignity and the Organization*, Monika Kostera and Michael Pirson (eds.), London: Palgrame MacMillan UK: 99–124.
- Held, Virginia, 2006, *The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, and Global*, New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0195180992.001.0001
- Henkin, Louis, 1992, “Human Dignity and Constitutional Rights”, in Meyer and Parent 1992: 39–42.
- Henderson, Christine Dunn, 2017, “On Bourgeois Dignity: Making the Self-Made Man”, in Debes 2017a: 269–290 (ch. 9).
- Herzog, Don, 2012, “Aristocratic Dignity?”, in Waldron 2012: 99–117. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.003.0005
- Hill, Thomas E., Jr, 1992, *Dignity and Practical Reason in Kant’s Moral Theory*, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Hobbes, Thomas, 1651, *Leviathan*, London: Crooke.
- Hollenbach, David, 2013, “Human Dignity: Experience and History, Practical Reason and Faith”, in McCrudden 2013b: 123–139 (ch. 6).
- –––, 2015, “Human Dignity in Catholic Thought”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 250–259. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.031
- Honneth, Axel, 2007, *Disrespect: The Normative Foundations of Critical Theory*, Cambridge: Polity Press.
- Howard, Rhoda E., 1992, “Dignity, Community, and Human Rights”, in *Human Rights in Cross Cultural Perspective; A Request for Consensus*, Abdullahi Ahmed An-Naʿim (ed.), Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 81–104.
- Howard, Rhoda E. and Jack Donnelly, 1986, “Human Dignity, Human Rights, and Political Regimes”, *American Political Science Review*, 80(3): 801–817. doi:10.2307/1960539
- Iglesias, Teresa, 2001, “Bedrock Truth and the Dignity of the Individual”, *Logos: A Journal of Catholic Thought and Culture*, 4(1): 114–134. doi:10.1353/log.2001.0005
- Ikeda, Takashi, 2014, “Commentary: On Crossing the Line between Human and Nonhuman: Human Dignity Reconsidered”, in *The Future of Bioethics: International Dialogues*, Akira Akabayashi (ed.), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 371–376. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682676.003.0047
- Imbach, Ruedi, 2014, “Human Dignity in the Middle Ages (Twelfth to Fourteenth Century)”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 64–73. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.007
- Jaber, Dunja, 2000, “Human Dignity and the Dignity of Creatures”, *Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics*, 13(1–2): 29–42. doi:10.1007/BF02694133
- James, David, 2013, *Rousseau and German Idealism: Freedom, Dependence and Necessity*, New York/Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139795388
- Jenson, Robert W., 2006, “*Anima Ecclesiastica*”, in Soulen and Woodhead 2006: 59–71.
- Jha, Alok, 2008, “First British Human-animal Hybrid Embryos Created by Scientists”, *The Guardian*, 2 April 2008. [[Jha 2008 available online](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2008/apr/02/medicalresearch.ethicsofscience)]
- Johnson, Samuel, 1755, “Dignity”, in *A Dictionary of the English Language*, London. Reprinted in *A Dictionary of the English Language: A Digital Edition of the 1755 Classic by Samuel Johnson*, Brandi Besalke (ed.), 2012. [[Johnson 1755 available online](https://johnsonsdictionaryonline.com/views/search.php?term=Dignity)]
- Johnston, Josephine and Christopher Eliot, 2003, “Chimeras and ‘Human Dignity’”, *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 3(3): 6–8. doi:10.1162/15265160360706714
- Jotterand, Fabrice, 2010, “Human Dignity and Transhumanism: Do Anthro-Technological Devices Have Moral Status?”, *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 10(7): 45–52. doi:10.1080/15265161003728795
- Kain, Patrick, 2009, “Kant’s Defense of Human Moral Status”, *Journal of the History of Philosophy*, 47(1): 59–101. doi:10.1353/hph.0.0083
- Kaplan, Marion A., 1999, *Between Dignity and Despair: Jewish Life in Nazi Germany*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Kant, Immanuel, 1785 [1996], *Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten*, Riga: Johann Friedrich Hartknoch. Translated as “Groundwork of The Metaphysics of Morals (1785)”, in *Practical Philosophy*, Mary J. Gregor (ed.), (The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996, 37–108. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511813306.007
- Kateb, George, 2011, *Human Dignity*, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
- Kaufmann, Paulus, Hannes Kuch, Christian Neuhäuser, and Elaine Webster (eds), 2011, *Humiliation, Degradation, Dehumanization: Human Dignity Violated*, (Library of Ethics and Applied Philosophy 24), Dordrecht/New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9661-6
- Kemmerer, Alexandra, 2013, “Dignified Disciplinarity: Towards a Transdisciplinary Understanding of Human Dignity”, in McCrudden 2013b: 649–658 (ch. 39).
- Kent, Bonnie, 2017, “In the Image of God: Human Dignity after the Fall”, in Debes 2017a: 73–97 (ch. 3).
- Killmister, Suzy, 2016, “Dignity, Torture, and Human Rights”, *Ethical Theory and Moral Practice*, 19(5): 1087–1101. doi:10.1007/s10677-016-9725-6
- –––, 2017, “Dignity: Personal, Social, Human”, *Philosophical Studies*, 174(8): 2063–2082. doi:10.1007/s11098-016-0788-y
- –––, 2020, *Contours of Dignity*, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198844365.001.0001
- Kilner, John F., 2004, “Human Dignity”, in *Encyclopedia of Bioethics*, Stephen G. Post (ed.), third edition, New York: Macmillan Reference USA, volume 2, 1193–1200.
- King, Martin Luther, 1963 [2011], “The Unresolved Race Question”, Speech, District 65 Thirtieth-Anniversary Convention, Madison Square Garden, New York City, 23 October 1963. Reprinted in *“All Labor Has Dignity”*, Michael K. Honey (ed.), Boston: Beacon Press, 87–98.
- –––, 1963 [1986], “Letter from Birmingham City Jail”, in *A Testamnet of Hope: The Essential Writing and Speechs of Martin Luther King*, James Melvin Washington (ed.), New York: Harper One, 289–302.
- Kittay, Eva Feder, 2003, “Disability, Equal Dignity and Care”, in Ammicht-Quinn, Junker-Kenny, and Tamez 2003: 105–115.
- –––, 2005, “At the Margins of Moral Personhood”, *Ethics* (Symposium on Disability), 116(1): 100–131. doi:10.1086/454366
- –––, 2011, “The Ethics of Care, Dependence, and Disability”, *Ratio Juris*, 24(1): 49–58. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9337.2010.00473.x
- Kofman, Sarah, 1982 [1997], “The Economy of Respect: Kant and Respect for Women”, Nicola Fisher (trans.), *Social Research*, 49(2): 383–404 (an extract from her *Le Respect des femmes (Kant et Rousseau)*, Paris: Galilée, 1982). Reprinted in *Feminist Interpretations of Immanuel Kant*, Robin May Schott (ed.), University Park, PA: Penn State Press, 1997, pp. 355–372.
- Kolnai, Aurel, 1976, “Dignity”, *Philosophy*, 51(197): 251–271. doi:10.1017/S003181910001932X
- Korsgaard, Christine M., 1986, “Kant’s Formula of Humanity”, *Kant-Studien*, 77(1–4): 183–202. doi:10.1515/kant.1986.77.1-4.183
- Kraynak, Robert P. and Glenn E. Tinder (eds), 2003, *In Defense of Human Dignity: Essays for Our Times*, (Loyola Topics in Political Philosophy), Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
- Krishnamurthy, Meena, 2022, “Martin Luther King Jr. on Democratic Propaganda, Shame, and Moral Transformation”, *Political Theory*, 50(2): 305–336. doi:10.1177/00905917211021796
- Kuhse, Helga, 2000, “Is There a Tension between Autonomy and Dignity?”, in *Bioethics and Biolaw, Volume II: Four Ethical Principles*, Peter Kemp, Jacob Dahl Rendtorff, and Niels Mattson Johansen (eds), Copenhagen: Rhodos International Science and Art Publishers, 61–74.
- LaFollette, Hugh and Niall Shanks, 1996, “The Origin of Speciesism”, *Philosophy*, 71(275): 41–61. doi:10.1017/S0031819100053250
- LaVaque-Manty, Mika, 2017, “Universalizing Dignity in the Nineteenth Century”, in Debes 2017a: 301–322 (ch. 10).
- Lebech, Mette, 2009, *On the Problem of Human Dignity: A Hermeneutical and Phenomenological Investigation*, Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.
- Lee, Patrick and Robert P. George, 2008, “The Nature and Basis of Human Dignity”, *Ratio Juris*, 21(2): 173–193. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9337.2008.00386.x
- Lewis, Milton, 2007, “A Brief History of Human Dignity: Idea and Application”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 93–105. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_8
- Loewy, Erich H., 1999, “Physician Assisted Dying and Death with Dignity: Missed Opportunities and Prior Neglected Conditions”, *Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy*, 2(2): 189–194. doi:10.1023/A:1009997829750
- Loike, John, 2013, “The Evolving Bioethical Landscape of Human-Animal Chimeras”, in *Human Dignity in Bioethics: From Worldviews to the Public Square*, Stephen Dilley and Nathan J. Palpant (eds), New York/Abingdon: Routledge, 282–299.
- Lorberbaum, Yair, 2014, “Human Dignity in the Jewish Tradition”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 135–144. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.015
- Malpas, Jeff, 2007, “Human Dignity and Human Being,” in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 27–42.
- Malpas, Jeff, and Norelle Lickiss, 2007a, “Introduction to a Conversation”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 1–5. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_1
- ––– (eds), 2007b, *Perspectives on Human Dignity: A Conversation*, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0
- Luban, David, 2009, “Human Dignity, Humiliation, and Torture”, *Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal*, 19(3): 211–230. doi:10.1353/ken.0.0292
- Luo, An’xian, 2014, “Human Dignity in Traditional Chinese Confucianism”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 177–181 (ch. 17). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.021
- Macklin, Ruth, 2003, “Dignity Is a Useless Concept”, *BMJ*, 327(20–27): 1419–1420. doi:10.1136/bmj.327.7429.1419
- Mandeville, Bernard, 1714 [1988], *The Fable of the Bees*, 2 vols., London. Reference is to the reprint with introduction by F. B. Kaye, Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund Press, 1988.
- Manning, Rita C., 2009, “A Care Approach”, in *A Companion to Bioethics*, Helga Kuhse and Peter Singer (eds), Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 105–116. doi:10.1002/9781444307818.ch11
- McCrudden, Christopher, 2008, “Human Dignity and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights”, *European Journal of International Law*, 19(4): 655–724. doi:10.1093/ejil/chn043
- –––, 2013a, “In Pursuit of Human Dignity: An Introduction to Current Debates”, in McCrudden 2013b: 1–58 (ch. 1).
- ––– (ed.), 2013b, *Understanding Human Dignity* (Proceedings of the British Academy 192), Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.5871/bacad/9780197265642.001.0001
- McMahan, Jeff, 2002, *The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the Margins of Life*, (Oxford Ethics Series), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0195079981.001.0001
- McNamee, M. J. and S. D. Edwards, 2006, “Transhumanism, Medical Technology and Slippery Slopes”, *Journal of Medical Ethics*, 32(9): 513–518. doi:10.1136/jme.2005.013789
- Metz, Thaddeus, 2010, “Human Dignity, Capital Punishment, and an African Moral Theory: Toward a New Philosophy of Human Rights”, *Journal of Human Rights*, 9(1): 81–99.
- Meulen, Ruud ter, 2010, “Dignity, Posthumanism, and the Community of Values”, *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 10(7): 69–70. doi:10.1080/15265161003728852
- Meyer, Michael J., 1987, “Kant’s Concept of Dignity and Modern Political Thought”, *History of European Ideas*, 8(3): 319–332. doi:10.1016/0191-6599(87)90005-2
- –––, 1989, “Dignity, Rights, and Self-Control”, *Ethics*, 99(3): 520–534. doi:10.1086/293095
- –––, 2001, “The Simple Dignity of Sentient Life: Speciesism and Human Dignity”, *Journal of Social Philosophy*, 32(2): 115–126. doi:10.1111/0047-2786.00083
- Meyer, Michael J. and William A. Parent (eds), 1992, *The Constitution of Rights: Human Dignity and American Values*, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Midgley, Mary, 1984, *Animals and Why They Matter*, Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.
- Mieth, Dietmar, 2014, “Human Dignity in Late-Medieval Spiritual and Political Conflicts”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 74–84. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.008
- Migiel, Marilyn, 1991, “The Dignity of Man: A Feminist Perspective”, in *Refiguring Woman: Perspectives on Gender and the Italian Renaissance*, Marilyn Migiel and Juliana Schiesari (eds), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 211–232.
- Mikkola, Mari, 2021, “Why Dehumanization is Distinct from Objectification”, in *The Routledge Handbook of Dehumanization*, Maria Kronfeldner (ed.), London and New York: Routledge, 326–340.
- Miller, Sarah Clark, 2012, *The Ethics of Need: Agency, Dignity, and Obligation*, (Routledge Studies in Philosophy), New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203334393
- Morawa, Alexander H. E., 2003, “Vulnerability as a Concept of International Human Rights Law”, *Journal of International Relations and Development*, 6(2): 139–155.
- Morris, Bertram, 1946, “The Dignity of Man”, *Ethics*, 57(1): 57–64. doi:10.1086/290530
- Moyn, Samuel, 2013, “The Secret History of Constitutional Dignity”, in McCrudden 2013b: 95–112 (ch. 4).
- Muray, Leslie A., 2007, “Human Uniqueness vs. Human Distinctiveness: The ‘Imago Dei’ in the Kinship of all Creatures”, *American Journal of Theology & Philosophy*, 28(3): 299–310.
- Murdoch, Iris, 1970, *The Sovereignty of the Good*, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
- Neal, Mary, 2012, “‘Not Gods But Animals’: Human Dignity and Vulnerable Subjecthood”, *Liverpool Law Review*, 33(3): 177–200. doi:10.1007/s10991-012-9124-6
- Neuhäuser, Christian, 2011, “Humiliation: The Collective Dimension”, in Kaufmann et al. 2011: 21–36. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9661-6_3
- Noddings, Nel, 1984, *Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics & Moral Education*, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Norcross, Alastair, 2004, “Puppies, Pigs, and People: Eating Meat and Marginal Cases”, *Philosophical Perspectives*, 18: 229–245. doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2004.00027.x
- Nordenfelt, Lennart, 2003, “Dignity of the Elderly: An Introduction”, *Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy*, 6(2): 99–101. doi:10.1023/A:1024150526303
- –––, 2009, “The Concept of Dignity”, in *Dignity in Care for Older People*, Lennart Nordenfelt (ed.), Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 26–53. doi:10.1002/9781444316414.ch2
- Novak, Michael, 1998, “The Judeo-Christian Foundation of Human Dignity, Personal Liberty, and the Concept of the Person”, *Journal of Markets and Morality* 1(2): 107–121.
- –––, 1999, “Human Dignity, Human Rights”, *First Things*, 97: 39–42.
- Nussbaum, Martha C., 1995, “Human Capabilities, Female Human Beings”, in Nussbaum and Glover 1995: 61–104. doi:10.1093/0198289642.003.0003
- –––, 2000a, “The Future of Feminist Liberalism”, *Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association*, 74(2): 47–79. doi:10.2307/3219683
- –––, 2002b, “The Worth of Human Dignity: Two Tensions in Stoic Cosmopolitanism”, in Clark and Rajak 2002: 31–49.
- –––, 2004, “Beyond ‘Compassion and Humanity’: Justice for Nonhuman Animals”, in *Animal Rights: Current Debates and New Directions*, Cass R. Sunstein and Martha Nussbaum (eds), New York: Oxford University Press, 299–320.
- –––, 2006a, *Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
- –––, 2006b, “The Moral Status of Animals”, *Chronicle of Higher Education*, 3 February 2006. [[Nussbaum 2006b available online](https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-moral-status-of-animals/)]
- Nussbaum, Martha C. and Jonathan Glover (eds), 1995, *Women, Culture, and Development: A Study of Human Capabilities*, (Wider Studies in Development Economics), Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0198289642.001.0001
- Ober, Josiah, 2014, “Meritocratic and Civic Dignity in Greco-Roman Antiquity”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 53–63. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.006
- O’Mathúna, Dónal P, 2006, “Human Dignity in the Nazi Era: Implications for Contemporary Bioethics”, *BMC Medical Ethics*, 7(December): article 2. doi:10.1186/1472-6939-7-2
- –––, 2013, “Human Dignity and the Ethics of Human Enhancement”, *Trans-Humanities Journal*, 6(1): 99–120. doi:10.1353/trh.2013.0012
- O’Neill, Onora, 1998, “Kant on Duties Regarding Nonrational Nature II”, *Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume*, 72: 211–228.
- Parekh, Serena, 2008, *Hannah Arendt and the Challenge of Modernity: A Phenomenology of Human Rights*, New York: Routledge.
- Pharo, Lars Kirkhusmo, 2014, “The Concepts of Human Dignity in Moral Philosophies of Indigenous Peoples of the Americas”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 147–154 (ch. 13). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.017
- Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 1486, *Oratio de hominis dignitate* (Oration on the dignity of man), C. Glenn Wallis, Paul J. W. Miller, and Douglas Carmichael (trans.), Indianapolis: Hackett, 1965.
- Pinker, Steven, 2008, “The Stupidity of Dignity”, *The New Republic*, 27 May 2008. [[Pinker 2008 available online](https://newrepublic.com/article/64674/the-stupidity-dignity)]
- Pluhar, Evelyn B., 1995, *Beyond Prejudice: The Moral Significance of Human and Nonhuman Animals*, Durham, NC: Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822396048
- President’s Council on Bioethics, 2008, *Human Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President’s Council on Bioethics*, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. [[President’s Council on Bioethics 2008 available online](https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/human_dignity/)]
- Pritchard, Michael S., 1972, “Human Dignity and Justice”, *Ethics*, 82(4): 299–313. doi:10.1086/291853
- Pufendorf, Samuel, 1672/1691 [2003], *De officio hominis et civis* (*The Whole Duty of Man, According to the Law of Nature)*, Andrew Tooke (trans.), 1735, Ian Hunter and David Saunders (eds), Indianapolis: Liberty Fund Press, 2003.
- Quinn, Philip, 2007, “On the Intrinsic Value of Human Persons”, in *Persons: Human and Divine*, Peter van Inwagen and Dean Zimmerman (eds), New York: Oxford University Press, 237–260.
- Rachels, James, 1990, *Created From Animals: The Moral Implications of Darwinism*, New York: Oxford University Press.
- Rolston, Holmes, 2008, “Human Uniqueness and Human Dignity: Persons in Nature and the Nature of Persons”, in *Human Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President’s Council on Bioethics*, Adam Schulman (ed.), President’s Council on Bioethics.
- Rosen, Michael, 2012a, *Dignity: Its History and Meaning*, Cambridge, MA/London: Harvard University Press.
- –––, 2012b, “Dignity Past and Present”, in Waldron 2012: 79–97. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.003.0004
- –––, 2013, “Dignity: The Case Against”, in McCrudden 2013b: 143–154 (ch. 7).
- Rotenstreich, Nathan, 1983, *Man and His Dignity*. Magnes Press, Hebrew University.
- Saastamoinen, Kari, 2010, “Pufendorf on Natural Equality, Human Dignity, and Self-Esteem”, *Journal of the History of Ideas*, 71(1): 39–62. doi:10.1353/jhi.0.0065
- Sandler, Ronald and John Basl, 2010, “Transhumanism, Human Dignity, and Moral Status”, *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 10(7): 63–66. doi:10.1080/15265161003714019
- Sangiovanni, Andrea, 2017, *Humanity Without Dignity: Moral Equality, Respect, and Human Rights*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Schachter, Oscar, 1983, “Human Dignity as a Normative Concept”, *American Journal of International Law*, 77(4): 848–854. doi:10.2307/2202536
- Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1840 [1965], *Über das Fundament der Moral*, Copenhagen. Translated as *On the Basis of Morality*, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrrill, 1965.
- Schroeder, Doris, 2012, “Human Rights and Human Dignity: An Appeal to Separate the Conjoined Twins”, *Ethical Theory and Moral Practice*, 15(3): 323–335. doi:10.1007/s10677-011-9326-3
- Schwöbel, Christopher, 2006, “Recovering Human Dignity”, in Soulen and Woodhead 2006: 44–58.
- Scott, Rebecca J., 2013, “Dignité/Dignidade: Organizing against Threats to Dignity in Societies after Slavery”, in McCrudden 2013b: 61–78 (ch. 2).
- Sensen, Oliver, 2011, “Human Dignity in Historical Perspective: The Contemporary and Traditional Paradigms”, *European Journal of Political Theory*, 10(1): 71–91. doi:10.1177/1474885110386006
- –––, 2017, “Dignity: Kant’s Revolutionary Conception,” in Debes 2017a: 237–262 (ch. 8).
- Shah, Mustafa, 2017, “Islamic Conceptions of Dignity: Historical Trajectories and Paradigms”, in Debes 2017a: 99–126 (ch. 4).
- Singer, Peter, 2009 “Speciesism and Moral Status”, *Metaphilosophy*, 40(3-4): 567–581. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2009.01608.x
- Shultziner, Doron, 2007, “Human Dignity: Functions and Meanings”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 73–92. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_7
- Sophocles, c. 441 BCE [1951], *Antigone*, in *The Loeb Classical Library: Sophocles Vol. 1* (LCL 21), F. Storr (trans.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Soskice, Janet, 2013, “Human Dignity and the Image of God”, in McCrudden 2013b: 229–244 (ch. 12).
- Soulen, R. Kendall and Linda Woodhead (eds), 2006, *God and Human Dignity*, Grand Rapids, MI/Cambridge, UK: William B. Eerdmans Publishing.
- Spelman, Elizabeth V., 1978, “On Treating Persons as Persons”, *Ethics*, 88(2): 150–161. doi:10.1086/292066
- Spiegelberg, Herbert, 1971, “Human Dignity: A Challenge to Contemporary Philosophy”, *The Philosophy Forum*, 9(1–2): 39–64. doi:10.1080/02604027.1971.9971711
- Statman, Daniel, 2000, “Humiliation, Dignity and Self-Respect”, *Philosophical Psychology*, 13(4): 523–540. doi:10.1080/09515080020007643
- Stern, A., 1975, “On Value and Human Dignity”, *Listening: Journal of Religion and Culture*, 1975(Spring): 74–90.
- Sulmasy, Daniel P., 2007, “Human Dignity and Human Worth”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 27–42. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_2
- Tadd, Win, Linus Vanlaere, and Chris Gastmans, 2010, “Clarifying the Concept of Human Dignity in the Care of the Elderly: A Dialogue between Empirical and Philosophical Approaches”, *Ethical Perspectives*, 17(2): 253–281. doi:10.2143/EP.17.2.2049266
- Tarling, Nicholas, 2007, “Dignity and Indignity”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 141–150. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_13
- Tasioulas, John, 2013, “Human Dignity and the Foundations of Human Rights”, in McCrudden 2013: 191–312 (ch. 17).
- Toscano, Manuel, 2011, “Human Dignity as High Moral Status”, *Les ateliers de l’éthique/The Ethics Forum*, 6(2): 4–25. doi:10.7202/1008029ar
- Trinkaus, Charles Edward, 1970, *In Our Image and Likeness: Humanity and Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought*, 2 vols., London: Constable.
- [UN] United Nations, 1945, *United Nations Charter*. [[UN 1945 available online](https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/full-text)]
- –––, 1948, *Universal Declaration of Human Rights*. [[UN 1948 available online](https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights)]
- Valadier, Paul, 2003, “The Person who Lacks Dignity”, in Ammicht-Quinn, Junker-Kerry, and Tamez, 2003: 49–56.
- Valentini, Laura, 2017, “Dignity and Human Rights: A Reconceptualisation”, *Oxford Journal of Legal Studies*, 37(4): 862–885. doi:10.1093/ojls/gqx011
- Van Assche, Kristof and Sigrid Sterckx, 2014, “The Protection of Human Dignity in Research Involving Human Body Material”, in *Humanity across International Law and Biolaw*, Britta van Beers, Luigi Corrias, and Wouter G. Werner (eds), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 265–287. doi:10.1017/CBO9781107257139.016
- Varga, Somogy, 2017, “Reflection taking refuge from history in morality: Marx, morality, and dignity”, in Debes 2017a: 291–300.
- Verbeek, Theo, 2014, “Rousseau and Human Dignity”, in Düwell et. al. 2014: 117–125. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.013
- Waldron, Jeremy, 2012, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, Meir Dan-Cohen (ed.), (Berkeley Tanner Lectures), New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.001.0001
- Walzer, Michael, 1994, *Thick and Thin: Moral Argument at Home and Abroad*, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
- Webster, Noah, 1806, A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language, New Haven, CT: Sidney’s Press,[[Webster 1806 available online](https://archive.org/details/compendiousdictionaryoftheenglishlanguage1806)].
- Weil, Simone, 1957 [1986], “La personne et le sacré”, written 1942/43, first published in *Écrits de Londres et dernières lettres*, Paris: Gallimard, 1957. Translated as “Human Personality”, in *Simone Weil: An Anthology*, Siân Miles (ed.), New York: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1986.
- Weithman, Paul, 2008, “Two Arguments from Human Dignity”, in President’s Council on Bioethics 2008: 435–467 (ch. 17). [[Weithman 2008 available online](https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/human_dignity/chapter17.html)]
- Wolf, Susan, 1995, “Commentary on: Martha Nussbaum’s ‘Human Capabilities, Female Human Beings’”, in Nussbaum and Glover 1995: 105–115. doi:10.1093/0198289642.003.0004
- Wood, Allen W., 1999, *Kant’s Ethical Thought*, (Modern European Philosophy), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139173254
- World Medical Association [WMA], 2013, “World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects”, 64th WMA General Assembly, Fortaleza, Brazil, October. [[WMA 2013 (Declaration of Helsinki) available online](https://www.wma.net/policies-post/wma-declaration-of-helsinki-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving-human-subjects/)]
- Zhuangzi [Chuang Tzu, late 4th century BCE], 1968, *The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu*, Burton Watson (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press.

**Academic Tools**[How to cite this entry](https://plato.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia/archinfo.cgi?entry=dignity).[Preview the PDF version of this entry](https://leibniz.stanford.edu/friends/preview/dignity/) at the [Friends of the SEP Society](https://leibniz.stanford.edu/friends/).[Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry](https://www.inphoproject.org/entity?sep=dignity&redirect=True) at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).[Enhanced bibliography for this entry](https://philpapers.org/sep/dignity/) at [PhilPapers](https://philpapers.org/), with links to its database.

## Other Internet Resources

- Council of Europe, 1997, “[Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine](https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list?module=treaty-detail&treatynum=164)” (ETS No. 164), Oviedo.
- 1689, “[English Bill of Rights](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/17th_century/england.asp)”
- 1789, [*Déclaration des Droits de l’Homme et du Citoyen*](https://www.conseil-constitutionnel.fr/le-bloc-de-constitutionnalite/declaration-des-droits-de-l-homme-et-du-citoyen-de-1789).
- NHS Confederation, Local Government Association, Age UK, 2012, “[Delivering Dignity: Securing Dignity in Care for Older People in Hospitals and Care](https://www.nhsconfed.org/publications/delivering-dignity)”.
- [The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/geneva-conventions-1949additional-protocols-and-their-commentaries)
- UNESCO, 2005, [Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights](https://en.unesco.org/themes/ethics-science-and-technology/bioethics-and-human-rights), 19 October 2005, Paris.

## Related Entries

[animals, moral status of](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-animal/) | [cognitive disability and moral status](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cognitive-disability/) | [ethics, biomedical: chimeras, human/non-human](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/chimeras/) | [Kant, Immanuel: moral philosophy](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-moral/) | [moral status, grounds of](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/grounds-moral-status/) | [recognition](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/recognition/) | [respect](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/respect/) | [rights: human](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rights-human/)

### Acknowledgments

I am deeply grateful to my anonymous referees, who provided careful, generous, and thorough feedback on initial drafts of this entry. For research assistance on various elements of this article I am grateful to Zachary Neemah, Samuel Munroe, Reese Faust, and Alejandro Toledo. The history section draws on my own introduction to *Dignity: A History* (2017a), by permission of Oxford University Press.

[Copyright © 2023](https://plato.stanford.edu/info.html#c) by

Remy Debes <[*rdebes@memphis.edu*](mailto:rdebes%40memphis%2eedu)>

[^1]: The Basic Law, Goos reminds us, is premised on “*Würde des Menschen*”—typically translated as human dignity. However, contrary to present day worries about the conceptual ambiguity of dignity, Goos explains that post-war German legal scholars expressed clear minded certainty about its meaning. Goos draws special attention to the influential constitutionalist, Günter Düring, who stated, “Having dignity means: being a personality” (translated and cited by Goos [2013: 81]). However, this certainty had ironic results, given the position of the *Grundgesetz* as a legal reaction to Nazi atrocities. Goos explains: According to Düring, a person “ripens” to personality when they hold themselves in relations of responsibility to God, self, and community. Accordingly, the fundamental right of the *Grundgesetz* belongs always and only to, “the responsible person, never the bondless individual” (Ibid). The problem is, by articulating positive, substantive conditions for what it takes to *have* dignity, Düring left room for distinguishing those who do *not* have it. In short, Düring left room for the idea of “subhumans”, whom Düring did indeed think were unprotected by the fundamental right of the *Grundgesetz*.

[^2]: To start, Kent (2017) herself notes that important exceptions to this trend in Christian theology can be found in John Scotus Eriugena and Robert Grosseteste. Or consider Soskice (2013). In some ways, Soskice is an example par excellence of the *imago Dei* platitude (see, e.g., 2013: 240). However, she notes that Christian and Jewish theologians have glossed what it means to be made “in the image of God” in different ways, many focusing on rational capacities or capacities for speech, but also noting that these properties have not been taken as decisive in individual cases. For example, babies are thought to be made in the image of God. In any event, she concludes that no specific set of qualities decisively characterizes what it means to be made in the image of God, and that “a certain vagueness is indeed desirable and ineliminable in the notion” (2013: 235). Reinforcing this point, Imbach (2014) notes that in the Middle Ages, the claim that humans were made in the image and likeness of God was understood in a number of ways. Hugo of Saint Victor and Anselm of Canterbury, for example, thought that the claim was true by virtue of the fact that human beings are rational (2014: 65). Bernard of Clairvaux thought that it was true by virtue of the fact that humans possess a free will (ibid.). And Bonaventure thought that it was true by virtue of the human possession of the faculties of memory, cognition, and willing (ibid.). This said, Imbach also admits that the operative concept of “dignity” in these traditions is inadequate from a contemporary perspective insofar as it is compatible with intra-human hierarchy and, more specifically, slavery and the death penalty (2014: 70–1). <br> Meanwhile, Hanvey (2013) argues that egalitarianism is tied to a few different strands of a Catholic concept of dignity, not all of which are based on *imago Dei*. In particular, he cites Leo XIII’s *Quod Apostolici Muneris* as a text that offers a “comprehensive statement of equality” and “of ultimate accountability in which responsibilities and corresponding rights may be applied” (2013: 214), but also Vatican II, especially *Gaudium et Spes* and *Dignitas Humanae* (2013: 215). Hanvey further argues that, in the Augustinian-Thomist tradition, although “reason might be necessary to secure human dignity, it cannot be sufficient” (2013: 221). Instead, human dignity is grounded in relation to God and other humans (ibid.), although it is unclear exactly what “is grounded in” means for Hanvey. For example, he sometimes emphasizes the “redemptive moment” of Catholic conceptions of human dignity, which he understands in terms of the “preservation” and “restoration” of dignity (2013: 223). But if dignity has to be preserved and can be restored, then its possession begins to look like a kind of achievement, and not as a property that humans have independently of their actions. Then again, there is understandable reason to render dignity at least in part, constitutively *relational*—“something which we are and possess, but also something which we are called to realize both in ourselves and others” (2013: 226–7). For, such ontological insecurity opens another line of thinking on original sin and its relation to human dignity in the Christian tradition. Thus Mieth (2014) distinguishes between the “dignity of creation, which could never be lost” and the “dignity of salvation that humans could lose through sin” (2014: 75). He attributes this distinction to Lotario dei Conti di Segni’s, *De miseria humanai conditionis*, and later to Pope Innocent III (ibid).<br> This “relational” line on the Christian concept of dignity is also explored and defended by Schwöbel (2006). However, Schwöbel comes round to underline the necessity of the relationship to God, as opposed to other humans. He argues that the threat to human dignity represented by original sin should be understood in terms of a denial of the status of the human being as a *creature*. The promise of the serpent, after all, is that human beings will create their own values and confer dignity on themselves, and this kind of self-conferral of dignity ultimately threatens it because genuine dignity is conferred by God in the act of creation. As such, dignity exists always through the human being’s relationship with God (2006: 52–3): <blockquote> If the relationship with God is no longer the foundational relationship for all human life, then human dignity becomes something that is conferred or withheld by other finite entities…It is no longer acknowledged and recognized as something that is already there in virtue of the fact that every human life in every stage of its development is created in the image of God, but instead becomes something that is actively constituted in social relationships between humans. If it is constituted in this way, however, it can also be denied and destroyed in this way. (2006: 53) </blockquote> <br> (See also, Jenson 2006, who notes that the kind of relationality referred to by Schwöbel is found in Christian trinitarian theology [2006: 59]. For Jenson, according to trinitarian theology, the Father, Son, and Spirit each owe their specific being to their relationships to the two other terms in the trinity [2006: 60]).<br> Finally, it should be noted that the doctrine of *imago Dei* is connected to human dignity in the Jewish Tradition in some distinctive ways. Thus, Lorberbaum (2014) notes that the claim that humans are made in the image and likeness of God involves a democratization of a Mesopotamian idea, in which the image and likeness of God was present only in kings and their offspring (2014: 138). Correspondingly, the doctrine of *imago Dei* has concrete political and legal ramifications in the Jewish tradition. Lorberbaum notes that it not only rejects royal theology but is brought to bear on what kinds of punishments were thought fitting for various crimes. For example, it formed the basis of the idea that the death penalty was an appropriate punishment for murder in Genesis, and it made desecration of the body unacceptable in response to any crime in Talmudic law (2014: 139–40). This said, he also notes that for Maimonides, the *active intellect* was the *mark* of the image of God. Thus, only those whose intellect was developed to a high degree existed in the image of God. In turn, “Unlike Rabbi Akiva and his school, Maimonides approved of capital punishment”, for the reason that the criminal’s deeds were proof that he does not exist in the image of God (2014: 142).

[^3]: The canonical tropes discussed in this section are also increasingly being challenged through the introduction of new historical sources for consideration. For example, despite his rejection of Pico as a Renaissance origin of our contemporary notion of human dignity, Copenhaver (2017) argues that Pico’s predecessor, Giannozzo Manetti, *does* seems to be a fruitful source. Similarly, Bayer (2014) argues that Martin Luther deserves a place in the theological study of *imago Dei*, in part for his clarity on explaining the break between the natural world and “man” (who is “most distinguished from other animals”). According to Luther, this break stems specifically from God’s “gifts” of language and reason (2014: 103). And Verbeek (2014) positions Rousseau as a critic of any view, like Pico’s or Luther’s, which assigns humans an “exalted position” in nature by “natural right”. For Rousseau, society not only corrupts human nature in ways that require us to struggle to regain authenticity, but also, this struggle ironically can succeed only *in* society. Verbeek thus writes of Rousseau:  <blockquote> Dignity is no longer a status in virtue of which an individual has rights and duties but something which to a large measure depends on others: it is through the mere presence of others that we lose it and it is only with others that we can regain it. (2014: 123) </blockquote> <br> <blockquote> New historical sources have also been introduced by those looking to connect contemporary debate on dignity to non-western religious and cultural traditions. For example, Metz (2010) finds the basis of human dignity in traditions of sub-Saharan African thought, which appeal to ideals of communal relationships that ground norms of interpersonal behavior. Or consider Düwell et. al.’s ambitious*Cambridge Handbook of Human Dignity* (2014), which offers entries on dignity in the indigenous thought of the Americas (Pharo 2014); Hinduism (Braarvig 2014b); Buddhism (Braavig 2014a), and Confucianism (Luo 2014), among others. Similarly, Shah (2017) gives us reason to think we would be well served by looking to classical Arabic traditions, especially for medieval origins of human dignity. </blockquote> <br> Finally, scholars are increasingly considering alternative narratives about human dignity that start from the viewpoints and experiences of historically oppressed and marginalized people within the western world, e.g., women, black and brown peoples, Latin-X peoples, gay and lesbian peoples, disabled people, etc. For example, Bernard Boxill (2017) reminds that romantic idealizations of human dignity in the modern world are belied by various social paradoxes. Boxill takes as his foil W.E.B DuBois’s efforts to endorse emergent ideas of human equality in the face of the gross inequity facing black people in the western world. Through this foil Boxill further explores the lamentable burden of other early Africana philosophers (c. 1800–1900) to reconcile the burgeoning ethos of dignity with the lived experience of oppression throughout the nineteenth century. Of course, this burden did not end in the nineteenth century. “I had hoped”, Martin Luther King wrote in 1963, from a Birmingham jail cell, <blockquote> that the white moderate would understand that the present tension in the South is a necessary phase of the transition from an obnoxious negative peace, in which the Negro passively accepted his unjust plight, to a substantive and positive peace, in which all men will respect the dignity and worth of human personality. (1963 [1986]: 295) </blockquote> <br> <blockquote>One wonders exactly what King meant by “dignity.” But that is partly the point of quoting him here. We have much still to learn about the conceptual history of dignity as it unfolded outside the boundaries of the white, male, western academic tradition. </blockquote>

[^4]: As for what Shultziner calls the “moral-philosophical” use of dignity, Shultziner advocates a distinction between “thick” and “thin” distinguishing properties. Thick conceptions, he argues, lean on the *human* side of “human dignity”, in order to articulate the norms of “good” or “bad” human worth, character and conduct. Thin conceptions lean on the *dignity* side of “human dignity”, to articulate the nature and conditions of what it means to humiliate or lower human worth in the light of the thick criteria (2007: 86).

[^5]: This point might bring to mind famous ideological critiques of modernity like Marxism or canonical attempts to analyze seismic historical evils like chattel slavery, colonialism, or the holocaust, such as those offered by Du Bois, Fanon, or Arendt. And, indeed, some of these views and authors have already been linked to the concept of dignity, albeit now sometimes critically and even skeptically, either explicitly at the source or through scholarly interpretation and analysis. For example, regarding Marx, see Healy and Wilkowska 2017, or Varga 2017. Regarding Du Bois, see Boxill 2017. Regarding Fanon, see his own remarks in *The Wretched of the Earth* (1963: 9, 21, 109) or *Black Skin, White Mask* (2008: 119). Regarding Arendt, see Parekh 2008.

[^6]: Earlier, we noted Killmister’s allowance that her three strands of dignity require different forms of recognition (one form for personal and social dignity; another for status dignity, including human dignity). And this might seem to be a monkey wrench in the attempt at unified theory. Appraisal respect and recognition respect are two very different things, as Darwall originally conceived them. They are two *kinds* of respect. So, given that respect fleshes out a principal definitional criterion about the normative function of dignity, why not think that the objects of these two kinds of respect are similarly distinct in kind?

[^7]: The term “recognition respect” comes originally from Darwall (1977). It is thus important to note that Darwall (2013) revised his view to better distinguish two species of recognition respect: “moral recognition respect” (or “moral respect”) and “honor recognition respect” (or “honor respect”) Moral respect requires a reciprocal recognition of the authority or standing to address second-personal claims and hold others responsible for those claims. By contrast, to honor respect another person is to recognize them as having a specific social status which not “just anyone” can have (Darwall 2013: 17). For the same reason, honor respect has an asymmetrical quality reflecting a difference in the facts about a person’s social role, such as one’s being a “representative of the court” or an “elder” or “upper class”, which difference both explains and is used to justify hierarchical patterns of recognition. In other words, when we honor respect another person, we make *greater* deference to them in our deliberations than they would expect in return, or we make*special* deference (e.g., the way “all rise” in American courtrooms at a judge’s entrance). This distinction between moral respect and honor respect is especially relevant in the context of human dignity, given that, as we saw, one prominent strand of modern dignity theory subscribes to something like Appiah’s or Waldron’s idea of dignity-as-elevated rank. Those views raise the question of whether the correct form of recognition in those theories is supposed to be what Darwall calls honor-respect? If so, how do they explain its hierarchical implications, which seem diametrically opposed to the core tenants of human dignity? Darwall (2017) asks some of these questions and concludes that such theories come up wanting.
