## 3 The Second-Person Stance and Second-Personal Reasons

When one says You, the I of the . . . I-You is said, too. Whoever says You does not have something for his object . . . he stands in relation. Relation is reciprocity. My You acts on me as I act on it.  
— Martin Buber, I and Thou

The task of this chapter will be to clarify the distinctive form of second-personal engagement that will be our main concern in this book: the addressing of second-personal reasons. There are many kinds of interaction, including many involving mutual awareness, that do not involve the reciprocal recognition that exists when one person gives another a reason to do something. Even within the set of reason-givings, for our purposes we sharpen our focus further in two ways. First, many such interactions also involve nonrational influence—intimidation, seduction, and so on. We are concerned solely with the pure giving of reasons, abstracting from nonrational factors (or with interactions *qua* second-personal address). Second, there are reason-givings where the reasons are not themselves second-personal. Our focus is on the (second-personal) address of second-personal reasons.

Something that looks like reciprocal recognition occurs also in nonrational settings. When two dogs lock gazes, for example, and eye each other with caution, eagerness, or hostility, there is certainly a form of mutual awareness, even if we don't suppose that dogs have the rich array of higher-order attitudes that typically accompany mutual human awareness.[^1] But awareness of this kind is not yet second-personal in our sense. It need involve no form of address, much less address of the other as a person. Two prize fighters, peering into each other's eyes for clues about the other's movements, are not really addressing each other (so far anyway). Their thought and experience involve a combination of first- and third-person perspectives that do not yet amount to a second-person stance, even when taken together. Each watches the other watching him. Neither relates to the other as a "you" to whom the first is a "you" in return. In Martin Buber's terms, the "I" of each is an "I-It" rather than an "I-You" (1970: 55).

Suppose, however, that one shoots a look of disdain at the other. This still may not be second-personal in any respect; it need not express disdain to the other. A look that shows (or even that seeks to show) disdain may not communicate it or even seek to. (Compare throwing a ball at someone, even throwing a ball at someone who is watching you throw it at her, with throwing a ball to her.) And even when someone communicates disdain, the attitude he communicates is not itself second-personal; it expresses no second-personal reason. Unlike indignation, resentment, and other Strawsonian "reactive attitudes," disdain lodges no claim or demand that essentially includes an RSVP.[^2] If a fighter says, "You ain't got nothin' " in response to a direct hit, he may be presupposing authority on the question of his opponents' pugilistic resources, or on the evaluative question of whether the opponent is appropriately disdained as an inferior fighter, or on various epistemic issues related to these, but he assumes thereby no authority to claim or demand anything of his opponent's will or actions.[^3]

Imagine now that one boxer says or expresses something to the other that does make such a claim. Suppose it is Muhammad Ali taunting Floyd Patterson in their 1965 heavyweight title fight with the relentlessly demanding question, "What's my name? What's my name?" This now is second-personal in the sense I have in mind. It is a demand to answer with the "You tell me . . ." understood. Questions can sensibly be addressed only to beings with the capacity and standing for creditable response.[^4] And this question evidently presupposes, not just the normative standing to ask, or even to demand an answer to, questions in general, or even to this question in particular, but also the authority to demand recognition by the name that Ali gave himself. (Patterson, you may recall, insisted on calling Ali "Cassius Clay" even though Ali had changed his name on converting to Islam.) This puts the case squarely within the territory with which we are concerned. Of course, Ali's was not a pure case of second-personal address. His purpose was also evidently instrumental, to dispirit and humiliate Patterson, to toy with and break him. But even here, to the extent that Ali regarded Patterson's merciless beating as deserved, he may have seen what he was doing in second-personal terms. He may have thought he was executing justice, person-to-person, exacting recognition of himself as a person.

Or consider the Vicar of Wakefield's remark that his daughters "had early learnt the lesson of looking presumption out of countenance" (Goldsmith 1901: 52). Is his statement second-personal in our sense, or not? It depends. If "looking presumption out of countenance" means looking at would-be suitors in ways that seek simply to cause discouragement or deflation of hopes for greater familiarity, then nothing second-personal need be going on at all. And even if the looking is a form of address, say to express disdain, then no claim or demand may be expressed, except, again, on the question of what to believe about the daughters' availability and attitude or on how noble or base it would be to presume anything about them. On the other hand, if their looks address, as it were, the charge of presumptuousness, then they do make a claim or demand on the suitors' will or conduct. They invite, request, or demand that the suitors back off. And, if so, they presuppose the authority to address the suitors in this way, and signify as well, as from the standpoint of the moral community, that the suitors had no authority to address them as they had.[^5]

Less dramatic and literary instances of second-personal address abound. Christine Korsgaard gives an example of a student who appears at the office door and asks if one is free to talk (1996e: 141).[^6] The student may presume no claim on one's time beyond that involved in considering her request. But she does presuppose that, as well as whatever else one presupposes when addressing a request or a question. She addresses herself to you as an independent person, in this case, as the person to whom she stands in a certain pedagogical relation. And she presupposes that you and she can take all this for granted in common.

There are important differences between these forms of address and ways that one might regard, say, one's pet cat. There can certainly be trappings of second-personality in the latter. One speaks and expresses emotions to and not simply at one's cat. Nonetheless, although we of course discipline them, we don't press claims against or hold our pets accountable in the same way we do with one another. So we need not presuppose nor reciprocally acknowledge that we (and they) have the competence needed to make this appropriate, for example, recognizing that we each have independent perspectives that we can each enter into.[^7] Granted, when I look into my cat's eyes, I can't get over the feeling that he is looking also into mine in some personal way or shake the hope that he is seeing me in some way other than "the guy who feeds or pets me." But I find it utterly impossible to sustain the thought that he can imaginatively enter into my point of view or acknowledge me as a being with an independent perspective.[^8] But this is precisely what Ali's, the Vicar's daughters', and the student's addresses presuppose.

### **Empathy and Adam Smith on Exchange**

This brings out the centrality of *empathy* to the second-person standpoint. We consider this in greater detail in Chapter 7, but it will be helpful to have some of the main elements before us now. When I see another as a "you," I see her as having the same relation reciprocally to me. I relate to her as relating reciprocally to me. What does this involve? Partly, it involves a rich set of higher-order attitudes: I am aware of her awareness of me, aware of her awareness of my awareness of her, aware of her awareness of my awareness of her awareness of me, and so on.[^9] Still, this can't be all there is to second-personal engagement since, as we have seen, mutual awareness that is not second-personal can have a similar structure. All of the awarenesses, at whatever level, might be non-second-personal, and if they are, they will not amount to second-personal awareness, no matter how high we pile them. The key difference is that she and I must be mutually aware of our second-personal *relating.* We must have a second-personal perspective on one another. I must be able to see her as responding (more or less rationally) to my address, which she also regards as an intelligible response or address to her.

This is what brings our respective perspectives into the interaction and requires that we be able to take each other's up. I must be able to see the other's response to my address as more or less rational from her point of view. I must be able to see my address through her eyes. Similarly, for her to make sense of my address, she has to see it as something that makes sense from my perspective. To see this vividly, consider a case where address misfires. "Do you have the time?" one person asks. "I'm sorry," the other replies; "I'm doing something right now." How does the first interpret this reply? She knows without recalling, let us suppose, what she meant: "What time is it?" But to figure out what the other thought she meant, she needs to remember what she said and consider how the other might have interpreted that from his point of view. As she recalls her words—not as if saying them, but from the perspective of her hearer—it occurs to her what her interlocutor must have taken her to mean: "Do you have time now to do something with or for me now (that would take longer than, say, telling the time)?"[^10]

Second-personality thus requires empathy or the capacity to put oneself in another's shoes. Imaginative projection into another's standpoint or "simulation," as it is sometimes called, is not the only thing that 'empathy' can refer to.[^11] And things get further confused by the fact that writers frequently use 'sympathy' to refer to a variety of phenomena that include simulation as well as other forms of empathy (such as emotional contagion and shared feelings).[^12] I prefer to use 'sympathy' for feelings of concern for others that are felt, not entirely as from their point of view, but as from a third-person perspective of one who cares for them, and to use 'empathy' for feelings that either imaginatively enter into the other's standpoint or result from his feelings by contagion.[^13] Second-personal interaction requires empathy in the sense of simulation or imaginative projection into the other's point of view (while, it should be noted, retaining a sense of one's own independent perspective).[^14]

A number of philosophers have argued that empathy (simulation) is involved quite generally in attributing mental states to others (Goldman 1989, 1992; Gordon 1986, 1992).[^15] There seems to be impressive experimental evidence for this hypothesis. In one experiment, Amos Tversky presented subjects with the following story:

> Mr. Crane and Mr. Tees were scheduled to leave the airport on different flights, at the same time. They traveled from town in the same limousine, were caught in a traffic jam, and arrived at the airport 30 minutes after the scheduled departure time of their flights. Mr. Crane is told that his flight left on time. Mr. Tees is told that his was delayed, and just left five minutes ago. Who is more upset? (Kahneman and Tversky 1982)

If you are like 96 percent of Tversky's subjects, you will say more or less instantly that Mr. Tees is more upset than Mr. Crane. How did you decide? Alvin Goldman (1989) argues that it is unlikely that we all possess common-sense theories that overlap on a generalization that we apply to the instant case or that we all think consciously about how we ourselves have felt in the past and infer by analogy. It seems far likelier that you simply unconsciously projected into Tees' and Crane's respective situations and imaginatively simulated feelings "in their shoes." If this is right, it will turn out that the ability (of at least one important kind) to attribute beliefs and feelings to others is intimately bound up with the capacity to engage one another second-personally.

Adam Smith, whose *Theory of Moral Sentiments* is one of the most comprehensive and subtle accounts of empathy's role in human thought and practice, broadly agrees with the simulationist claim. The only way to grasp "what other men feel," Smith says, is by "conceiving what we ourselves should feel in the like situation.... Though our brother is upon the rack, as long as we ourselves are at our ease, our senses will never inform us of what he suffers" (1982b: 9). It is no coincidence that Smith combines his insight into empathy's ubiquity with a keen appreciation of profoundly second-personal aspects of certain distinctive moral phenomena—specifically, of justice, mutual accountability, respect, and dignity—as demonstrated at various points later in this book.[^16] It is not far wrong, indeed, to think of Smith as one of first philosophers of the "second person," if not the very first.

The *Wealth of Nations,* for example, virtually begins with a discussion of the human capacity for the distinctive form of second-personal interaction that Smith calls "exchange" and its relation to mutual respect.[^17] When other animals need help, Smith says, they have no other "means of persuasion but to gain the favour of those whose service [they] require[e]....A puppy fawns upon its dam, and a spaniel endeavours by a thousand attractions to engage the attention of its master" (1976: 25). Currying sympathy and favor requires no capacity for second-personal address or for empathy. These are non-second-personal responses that can be gauged and elicited third-personally. Recall our initial example of getting someone to feel sympathy for you and your pained feet. The other's sympathetic concern need not respond to anything expressed from you, much less to any address that invites the other to give you standing in a second-personal relation.[^18]

Of course, we humans frequently do rely on one another's sympathy. Often, this is just fine, even desirable. "But man has almost constant occasion for the help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to expect it from their benevolence only" (Smith 1976: 25). Given the vagaries of human life, we often cannot expect others to care for us in this way. Moreover, attempting to gain others' favor can expose us to risks of subservience. By "servile and fawning attention," we may put ourselves at others' mercy and be vulnerable to their condescension if not domination.[^19] Happily, Smith believes, nature has given human beings a more dignified alternative: "the general disposition to truck, barter, and exchange" (25). Free exchange, in Smith's view, involves a second-personal address that presupposes a form of mutual respect.

We are familiar with the Smithian idea that in a society with a wellfunctioning economy, rich and poor alike meet their needs and wants through formal and informal markets that are sites for mutually advantageous exchanges. "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest" (Smith 1976: 25). But although its operative motive is self-interest, exchange is impossible without a presupposed second-personal normative infrastructure. Why are other animals incapable of exchange? "Nobody," he says, "ever saw a dog make a fair and deliberate exchange of one bone for another with another dog. Nobody ever saw one animal by its gestures and natural cries signify to another, this is mine, that yours; I am willing to give this for that" (25). Smith evidently thinks of exchange as an interaction in which both parties are committed to various normative presuppositions, for example, that the exchange is made by free mutual consent, that neither will simply take what the other has, and so on. Both parties must presume that the other is dealing fairly, not in the sense that what is offered is of fair value (*caveat emptor*—self-interest and bargaining regulate that), but that each is dealing honestly, that the offered goods will actually be delivered, that each is free to refuse the deal and walk away without coercion, that neither will attempt to reacquire through coercion what he freely trades away, and so on.

Exchange thus involves a reciprocal acknowledgment of norms that govern both parties and presupposes that both parties are mutually accountable, having an equal authority to complain, to resist coercion, and so on. To engage in exchange at all, therefore, one must be capable of the requisite reciprocal recognition, and this requires empathy. To gauge whether the other is bargaining in good faith, each must attempt to determine: whether the other is attempting to determine whether one is bargaining honestly, whether the other is attempting to determine whether one is attempting to determine whether the other is bargaining honestly, and so on. All this requires that both be able to put themselves imaginatively into the other's standpoint and compare the responses that one thinks reasonable from that perspective with the other's actual responses, as one perceives them third-personally.[^20] So what is required is not merely empathy, but also, as we shall see, regulation of both parties by claims, demands, and norms that make sense from a second-person standpoint.[^21]

### **Goading versus Guiding**

We return to the relation between empathy and second-personal thought and discourse in Chapter 7. We turn now to the difference between rational and non-rational forms of interpersonal influence. As we are defining it, second-personal address is reason-giving in its nature (and is distinguished further by the distinctive kind of reason it seeks to give). To focus properly on second-personal reason-giving, then, we must keep in mind W. D. Falk's distinction between "goading" and "guiding" (1953).[^22] Our task is complicated by the fact that even the pure address of second-personal reasons has, as I have already suggested, a directive element that is lacking in pure advice. As I understand it, second-personal address makes a claim on the addressee's will (and not, like advice, only on her beliefs about what there is reason for her to do). It presumes to tell another person, not just what to do in the way advice does, but also, in some way or to some extent, to do it. Nevertheless, it is a central theme of this book (and a reflection of Fichte's and Pufendorf 's Points) that such directive claims and demands differ fundamentally from coercion and other goadings. Second-personal address seeks to direct a person through her own free choice and in a way that recognizes her status as a free and rational agent.

It is relatively easy to distinguish between rational and nonrational influence at the extremes. A moral treatise addressed to the public at large that aims dispassionately to convince its readers of the justice of its cause by rational argument is evidently trying to guide rather than goad.[^23] A bully whose threatening looks put down challenges clearly goads rather than guides. But there are many cases in between that are not so clear. What about an offer that is unwelcome precisely because both parties know that the offeree will be unable to decline against his better judgment? Even if offers generally guide, this one might reasonably be regarded as goading. The felicity conditions for offers include that the offeree is free to decline, in the sense that it is presupposed by both parties that he may and can do so. An offer made because the offeree cannot but accept has the superficial appearance of a guiding but the "deep structure" of a goading.

Suppose, however, that the offer is not unwelcome, but that the offerer attempts to induce acceptance by forms of influence that are only incidentally related to reasons for accepting. Salespeople learn early on, for instance, that insinuating a personal relationship that operates under the radar of mutual awareness is usually a more effective strategy than dwelling on features. Charming, cajoling, humoring, dazzling, and intimidating all aim to persuade nonrationally, rather than (primarily, anyway) to give reasons. That doesn't mean that guiding must consist in simply listing bloodless facts. There are reasons—for example, about what it is like to undergo certain experiences—that we can only appreciate by forms of imaginative engagement that alter our usual ways of seeing things, for example, as by a powerful film or novel, or, as Hume put it, "by an eloquent recital of the case" (1985a: 230).

Coercion by threat is generally thought to goad, but it is worth pausing to consider why this should be so. We must distinguish, first, between "rational" coercion and literal force or intimidation. The latter seek to circumvent or undermine rational processes in a way that rational coercion does not. When someone threatens in, as it were, an unthreatening way, by saying something like, "I feel bound to tell you that if you don't do A, then evils X, Y, and Z will occur," she may correctly suppose that this gives the coerced agent a genuine reason, which the agent may appreciate and act on. So why don't threats guide rather than goad? Obviously, if someone else were simply to inform the agent of the threat, which he honestly believed to be a reason to acquiesce, this would be guiding rather than goading. Why does it become goading when the threat is voiced, even "unthreateningly," by the threatener?

When someone simply informs another of an evil that will befall him if he does something, even if it is the person herself who will cause the evil, the reason given is not distinctively second-personal. It need not be capable of being addressed to exist nor need it be addressed for someone to come to have it. I may arrange for someone to learn of my intention to do X, Y, and Z should he not do A in ways that involve no form of address whatsoever (perhaps I get him to read it in my diary).

Of course, a threat doesn't simply inform. Perhaps the reason why threats goad is that they create a reason in the sense that whether the threat is given or carried out is itself up to the threatener. True enough, but there are many cases where one person creates a reason in giving it to another that do not thereby become goadings rather than guidings. When you order the Eggs Benedict, you give the waiter a reason for bringing it to you that didn't exist prior to your request. But here you are guiding, not goading. The difference is that in this case you and the waiter both accept the background authority relations that give you standing to order and thereby create reasons for him to act in this way. Nothing like this holds with pure threats, although it does, of course, with what are sometimes called "threats" that are backed by mutually accepted law, custom, or morality. If a teacher "threatens" to give a pop quiz unless her students read their assignments more assiduously, and all agree that this is fully within her authority, then she doesn't simply goad her students—she gives them a further reason to study. What she does is not really a threat in the coercing or goading sense; she puts them on notice of a sanction that it is within her authority to apply.

What makes coercion by "rational" threats goading rather than guiding, in my view, is that it purports to create reasons in something like the way that legitimate claims or demands do, that is, second-personally, but without the appropriate normative backing for the threatened "sanctions," which consequently provide only the superficial appearance of an accountability relation. It is as if they attempt to substitute the power involved in a credible threat for the notice of an authorized sanction that would turn their goading into a second-personal guiding. Indeed, it is not unusual for threats or other forms of coercion or manipulation to be accompanied by self-indulging rationalizing fantasies of justified authority. Tyrants and batterers frequently comfort themselves by imagining the righteousness of their cause. Or they may flip back and forth between a self-serving rationalization for their "authority" and threats pure and simple.[^24]

Suppose, however, that someone has the authority to apply some sanction. Suppose, to return to our earlier example, that you have the authority to lift, firmly but gently, someone else's foot from on top of yours if he refuses to remove it voluntarily. Suppose you inform him of this, putting him on notice that, if he doesn't move his foot, then you will move it for him. If you have this authority, then however directive your demand, this threatening notice will not amount to coercion. It would, however, be coercion if you were to threaten to move his foot firmly but gently from, say, your favorite part of the public sidewalk, since you have no authority to demand that he do that. In my view, the very distinction between coercion and notification of, as Pufendorf put it, "an evil" that "falls upon [one] justly" can only be made within the circle of second-personal concepts and, ultimately, from a second-person standpoint (Pufendorf 1934: 91).[^25]

### **Speech Acts and Felicity Conditions**

In the next section we briefly consider second-personal theoretical reasoning—the addressing of reasons for belief—in order to prepare the way for some important contrasts that are necessary to understand the distinctive character of second-personal practical reasons. Before that, however, it is useful to have before us more explicitly the Austinian framework for analyzing speech acts that we have implicitly been assuming. This is especially relevant to understanding second-personal practical reasons. Nonetheless, it becomes clear in the next section that it is necessary also if we are to grasp how we can address reasons for belief, as well as practical reasons that are not peculiarly second-personal.

Austin (1975) was concerned with how the conventional character of language makes it possible for people to perform a wide variety of "speech acts" in uttering a sentence—to name a ship, take a spouse, issue a warning, place a bet, and so on. Austin analyzes speech acts along three dimensions: (a) the locutionary (semantic content of the utterance), (b) the illocutionary (what the agent does in uttering a sentence), and (c) the perlocutionary (what further effects uttering a sentence brings about). Thus, an uttering of "There is a lion loose in the area" may simultaneously express a semantic content concerning the presence of *Panthera leo* (locutionary), constitute a warning (illocutionary), and save the lives of those who hear it (perlocutionary).

Illocutionary acts invariably involve an element of address, even if only to an audience at large, as can be brought out by surveying Austin's categories. Austin lists the following kinds: "verdictives" (judicial verdicts and other official findings), "exercitives" (other exercisings of authority, such as voting or claiming), "commissives" (which commit the speaker, like a promise or contract), "behabitives" (second-personal reactions to actions or events, such as blaming, thanking, or apologizing), and "expositives" (addressed "acts of exposition," such as affirming or denying) (1975: 150–163). Our concern is primarily with the distinctively second-personal reasons that are presupposed, invoked in, or related to *exercitives, behabitives,* and *commissives.*[^26] In the next section, however, we focus on the *expositives* that are involved in *theoretical* (non-second-personal) reason-giving.

Austin holds that illocutionary acts of all kinds have "felicity" conditions: what must be true for the agent to succeed in performing an (conventionally defined) illocutionary act of a specific kind—for example, for a speech act to be a warning or an order—or what must be true for the act to have been performed properly (in conventional terms). When conditions of the first sort are unmet, Austin says that the act "misfires"; no act of that specific kind occurs. And when those are satisfied, but conditions of the second sort are not, he says that the illocutionary act is "abused." An act of the relevant kind is performed, but not properly (1975: 18). Again, 'proper' here should be understood in conventional, not in normative, terms. An outsider who finds an applicable convention thoroughly objectionable may nonetheless correctly judge an act proper in these conventional terms. (In this case, although the outsider must agree that the Austinian (conventional) felicity conditions are satisfied, she may deny that the "normative felicity conditions" are—no genuinely normative reason, she thinks, has been thereby addressed.)

> Two especially relevant felicity conditions of the first sort are the following:  
> A.1. There must exist an accepted conventional procedure having a certain conventional effect, the procedure to include the uttering of certain words by certain persons in certain circumstances.  
> A.2. The particular persons and circumstances in a given case must be appropriate for the invocation of the particular procedure invoked. (26, 34)

By a conventional procedure, Austin means something that has sufficiently wide *de facto* authority. Suppose that one person attempts to challenge another to a duel with the archaic, "My seconds will call on you." As Austin notes, this would have amounted to a challenge in earlier times, but because most people now reject dueling and its associated codes of procedure and honor, it is possible now to shrug off such an attempt as ridiculous (although, notoriously, not in certain settings) (27). Because the requisite *de facto* authority is absent, the attempted challenge "misfires." When, however, the codes were widely enough accepted, this was not so. When enough people accepted that someone challenged is under an obligation to take it up on pain of dishonor and recognized this form of words, then uttering them was normally sufficient, so long as other conditions held, to issue a challenge and thereby create the obligation to respond, at least so far as the conventions were concerned. You can't get an 'ought' from an 'is', so the thought is not, again, that any genuine obligation *(de jure)* followed from the existence of the challenge. Rather, the idea is that the challenge could itself exist in Austin's *de facto* conventional sense *only-if* enough people accepted that the person challenged was under an obligation *(de facto)* to respond.

In addition, there are other conditions that, though not necessary for the relevant illocutionary act to be performed, are nonetheless necessary for it not to be an "abuse" of the relevant speech act and so be unhappy in another respect. These conditions require that participation in the practice be authentic and sincere in various ways.[^27] Austin's examples of abuses include insincere promises, congratulations, and advice (40–47). If I make a promise with no intention of keeping it, then, so long as the other felicity conditions are satisfied, I promise all right, but in doing so I violate norms that my promise itself presupposes. Similarly, if one person challenges another, but does not accept, and has no intention of abiding by, the norms of honor and "respect" that structure the practice of dueling, he challenges "abusively."

Austin's framework can be applied to speech acts in which one person attempts to give another a (normative) reason to do something. There are norms of advice-giving (with non-second-personal reasons), for example, which advisors and advisees implicitly presuppose when they respectively give and receive advice. Even if one does not in fact accept these norms, if one presents oneself as advising, the other is entitled to assume that one does or, at least, that one will conduct oneself as though one did. Moreover, the norms also give the other grounds for censure if they are violated. If it turns out that my "advice" was simply self-serving, you have grounds for complaint. Similarly, when one person attempts to give another a second-personal reason, through an order, claim, request, or whatever, she presupposes that both parties accept norms that ground these reasons and the standing to address them.

### **Addressing Reasons for Belief**

Philip Pettit and Michael Smith (1996) have argued for a version of these claims regarding the mutual giving of reasons for belief and action, in general (see also Bohman 2000).[^28] In their view, we invariably take up a "conversational stance" that carries significant assumptions whenever we seriously express our views to one another about what there is reason to believe and do. Pettit and Smith do not discuss the addressing of second-personal reasons as a special case. It is helpful, therefore, to consider their discussion, both for the light it sheds on the role of reciprocal recognition in all serious conversation about what to believe and do and to provide a contrasting background against which to grasp the distinctive connection between reciprocal recognition and second-personal practical reasons.

"Conversation," Pettit and Smith say, "is the means whereby we recognize others and seek recognition from them" (1996: 430). In serious "conversation of an intellectual kind," people "authorize their interlocutors and in turn assume authorization by them" (430, 432). When the issue is what to believe, both parties presume in common that "they are each authorities worth listening to" and that, when they differ, "a review of the evidence commonly available can usually reveal who is in the wrong and thereby establish agreement" (430–431). The point is not that participants in serious common inquiry must believe either that the other party is credible or judicious or even sufficiently intellectually competent to be worth engaging in serious discussion. Rather, discussion in earnest must proceed on the assumption that the other is a competent theoretical reasoner. Otherwise, a genuine discussion with her about what to believe simply doesn't make sense in its own terms.

Specifically, Pettit and Smith claim that participants who take up the "conversational stance" must each assume: (1) that there are norms that govern what each should believe, (2) that each can recognize these norms, and (3) that each is capable of guiding her beliefs by them (1996: 433). The point, again, is that mutual reason-giving makes sense in its own terms *only-if* this is presupposed. It makes sense to engage in a discussion for the purpose of determining what to believe *only-if* one assumes that the other is a competent reasoner and that she accepts and is guided by norms for belief. Of course, there might be all sorts of extrinsic reasons for entering into a conversation that has the appearance of authentic interactive inquiry that do not require such an assumption. Or one might take "discussion" with another as evidence in some other way (as in, "I always believe the opposite of what he says").

This is a stronger claim than the general Austinian point about speech acts. An advisor must generally assume, for example, that her advisee is sufficiently capable of normative guidance to follow her advice. But this doesn't commit her to assuming that he can give advice himself or take part in a genuinely mutual conversation about what to do. Still, even if not all theoretical and practical reason-giving presupposes the reciprocal authority that serious conversations have as "the price of admission," I argue that addressing distinctively second-personal practical reasons does invariably presuppose a common authority that addresser and addressee have alike as free and rational agents. The holding of this assumption is, I claim, a "normative felicity condition" of any second-personal address whatsoever in the sense that it is a necessary condition of the second-personal reasons actually existing and being given through address.

In this section, however, our purpose is to understand the presuppositions of theoretical reason-giving so that we can then contrast these with those of addressing second-personal reasons. A few words are needed, therefore, about belief. By its very nature, belief is responsible to an independent order of fact, which it aims to represent in a believer-neutral way. Belief is regulated by an independent truth (Shah 2003; Shah and Velleman forthcoming). Unlike, for example, an assumption that *p,* a belief that *p* is mistaken when *p* is false, though an assumed proposition is no less false than a believed one. Of course, what reasons people have to believe things about the world depend in many ways on where they stand in relation to it. But ultimately their reasons must be grounded in something that is independent of their stance, namely, what is the case believer-neutrally. Our beliefs are simply the world (including our place in it) as seen (committedly) from our perspective; what we should believe depends ultimately on the world as it actually is.

This has important consequences for what we must assume when we address reasons for belief to one another. As recent discussions of testimony have brought out, there are cases in which doxastic reasons are at least superficially second-personal (Burge 1993; Coady 1992; Foley 1994; Hinchman 2000; Moran 2005). Someone can give you a reason to believe something not just by pointing to evidence, but also by simply telling you it is so. When you believe something for this reason, you give the person whose testimony you trust a kind of second-personal authority in your own reasoning about what to believe. But this authority is not second-personal all the way down. It ultimately depends upon and is defeasible by epistemic authority. If you come to believe that the person's testimony is absolutely unreliable, you will no longer give him second-personal authority in a serious conversation about what to believe.

Someone can address reasons for belief, therefore, *only-if* we take him to have some epistemic authority, or, at least, *only-if* we don't take him to have none. Even if we unavoidably make such an assumption, in Davidsonian fashion, in interpreting him as minded at all, it is nonetheless the presumed relation to the facts as they are anyway that, as we must assume, earns him the standing to give reasons to us. Were we to believe his utterances to be only randomly related to the way things actually are, he could give us no reasons for belief, if indeed we could interpret him as saying anything at all. As I indicated earlier, this contrasts with the authority to address second-personal practical reasons. Although knowledge and wisdom, even about practical affairs, is sometimes a ground for endowing someone with some kinds of second-personal authority over conduct, it is not what such authority consists in. And there are some kinds of second-personal authority, arguably that of persons as such, that require relatively little epistemic authority.

### **Addressing Second-Personal Practical Reasons**

Pettit and Smith discuss the mutual giving of practical reasons as though it were fully analogous to reciprocal theoretical reasoning. Just as conversants about what to believe mutually recognize norms for belief and their competence to be guided by them, along with the standing both have to address reasons based in these norms, so likewise, Pettit and Smith argue, do individuals involved in a serious conversation about what to do commit themselves to analogous assumptions concerning norms for desire and action, their capacity to guide themselves by these norms, and their standing to give reasons grounded in them.

If practical reason-giving were fully analogous to theoretical reasongiving, then we should expect all authority in the former also to be fundamentally epistemic, albeit about what there is reason to desire and do. Even if the agent's question is what to do rather than what to believe, we would appropriately think that someone is in a position to give a practical reason to another *only-if* she has knowledge or reasonable belief about reasons for the person to act whose existence is, except in arcane cases, quite independent of her giving them to him or even of her capacity to do so. She would thus earn the authority to stand in the reason-giving relation to the other by virtue of her access to something that holds anyway, independently of their relation: the relation-independent facts of what he should do.

This model works well enough for some forms of practical reasongiving, specifically, whenever the reason-giving relation is that of advice.[^29] Advisors purport to give reasons to their advisees that hold independently of the advising relation or of their competence to stand in it. This picture is misleading, however, for the distinctively second-personal practical reasons with which we are primarily concerned in this book. Recall our familiar example. Eliciting someone's sympathy by manifesting your evident pain is not exactly advising, but it is like it, and like theoretical reason-giving, in that the reason he comes to see is independent of any standing you might have to give it to him.[^30] The reason would hold and could be successfully given even if, perhaps especially if, you were an infant and utterly incapable of advising anyone.

If however, you address a demand that he move his foot, you initiate a reciprocally recognizing relation and presuppose the authority in which you take the reason you address to be grounded. And you implicitly endow your addressee with the competence to consider and act on your request or demand and also, in this case, recognize his authority to address like reasons back to you in relevantly similar circumstances. Unlike reasons for belief and practical reasons one might give in advice, reasons of this kind are second-personal in their nature.[^31] Their very existence depends on being able to be addressed person-to-person. Unlike the reason having to do with the simple badness of your being in pain, the fact that you can and do reasonably demand that he move his foot simply would not obtain but for the common competence and authority to enter into second-personal relations of reciprocal address. The authority you presuppose is second-personal all the way down.

I argue therefore that the authority to address practical reasons can take forms that are quite different from the epistemic authority that is presupposed either by theoretical reason-giving or by other forms of practical reason-giving, like advice, where the reasons are not second-personal.[^32] Second-personal reasons of all kinds presuppose an authority to address second-personal reasons that cannot be reduced to or derived from propositions of value or right that do not already presuppose some second-personal standing to claim or demand. In a slogan: You can't get a second-personal demand out of something that doesn't already (at least implicitly) involve second-personal authority. Or, to paraphrase Bernard Williams: "Second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in."[^33] This is a fundamental difference between theoretical and practical reason. In theoretical reason-giving, the authority to enter into the reason-giving relation to another person ultimately derives from the putative authority's access to facts that hold independently of that relation or the competence to enter into it.[^34] Second-personal reasons of the kind we are interested in, by contrast, are relational all the way down. They ultimately derive from normative relations that reciprocally recognizing persons assume to exist between them.

### **Second-Personal Reasons, Accountability, and Respect**

There is another important feature of second-personal reasons that fits them distinctively to accountability. As we have seen, to recognize a second-personal reason is implicitly to acknowledge someone's authority. This means that when second-personal reasons are proffered, issues of *respect* are invariably at stake. If the private fails to heed the sergeant's orders, he doesn't simply act contrary to a reason that sheds favorable light; he violates the order and so disrespects the sergeant and her authority. If your foot-treader fails to respond to your demand, he fails also to meet your legitimate expectation and so disrespects your standing to make the claim and, therefore, you. Even in a case where one has no genuine claim except to make a request or a plea, if someone to whom one addresses the request refuses even to give one a hearing, this too is a kind of disrespect.

Disrespect is, in its nature, a violation of, an offense against, or an affront to a *dignity,* to which the appropriate response is some second-personal attitude or action that seeks (demands) recognition of the dignity from the violator. Whatever grounds the dignity of a person, officer, or institution to address a claim, order, request, and so on, also grounds actions and attitudes by them, or on their behalf, that seek to reestablish reciprocally recognizing respect. "Reactive" attitudes and actions themselves implicitly address second-personal reasons to the violator that presuppose the very authority of which the actions and attitudes seek to reestablish reciprocal recognition.[^35] In the next chapter, we consider the ways in which reactive attitudes like blame, reproach, resentment, and indignation are second-personal. They address violators in a way that, as Strawson puts it, "continu[es] to view him as a member of the moral community; only as one who has offended against its demands" (1968: 93). Reactive attitudes can thus reinforce and reestablish reciprocal respect as an equal member in a mutually accountable community.

[^1]: For example, one dog may eye another eagerly and begin to play to induce mimicking play in the other. But even if we can call such behavior intentional, it wouldn't amount to a second-personally addressed invitation in the sense of this book. For discussion that stimulated this example, I am indebted to Will Darwall.
[^2]: For relevant discussion, see Chapters 4 and 6. Another good example of a reaction that is unlike reactive attitudes in having no second-personal component is disgust (which involves the desire not to engage, but to distance, disgorge, expel, etc.) On disgust, see Miller 1997.
[^3]: This insult does, of course, issue a kind of challenge to his opponent to respond. But the insulter need not claim or demand his opponent's response. There seem to be two separable aspects of such a challenge. One is an implicit claim of fact (and hence a claim on his opponent's beliefs and theoretical reasoning, if that doesn't seem too ludicrous in the context), namely, that he will win and there is nothing that his opponent can do about it (or do about his insult). The second is a challenge to his opponent's honor (in the conventional sense that outsiders or alienated insiders may reject and that can come apart from his moral dignity; on this distinction, see Chapter 6). This latter sense does have a clear second-personal dimension, but even here there seems no implicit claim or demand on the other's conduct. Finally, consensual participation in the fight does have a second-personal aspect. Each invites his opponent's response (even preemptive) and waives any rights against assault he might ordinarily have (and, in contemporary professional boxing anyway, both apparently waive any rights against insult as well).

[^4]: Of course, an assertion to an opponent that his punches are "nothin' " also presupposes the opponent's competence to understand the remark, and so on.
[^5]: Consider the difference between a disdainful rolling of the eyes and a look that expresses resentment or indignation ("looking daggers"). The latter clearly addresses its object (with an RSVP) in a way that the former does not. A vivid recent example is the famous "staredown" the Italian ice dancer, Barbara Fusar Poli, gave her partner of twelve years, Maurizio Margaglio, after he dropped her during the completion of their "original dance" in the Ice Dancing competition at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Torino, Italy. According to one account, "When the music stopped, the two stood facing each other for nearly a minute at center ice, Fusar Poli steaming as her eyes burned through Margaglio" (Juliet Macur, "After Staredown, a De´tente for an Italian Pair," *New York Times,* February 21, 2006). Or as the caption under a photograph of the "staredown" in the Internet edition of the *San Diego Union-Tribune* had it: "Barbara Fusar Poli to partner Maurizio Margaglio: Look me in the eye and tell how you dropped me" (http://www.signonsandiego.com/ sports/olympics/20060220-9999-lz1x20falls.html). Suppose, however, that Fusar Poli had disdainfully rolled her eyes after the fall and skated off in disgust. Any expressive address in that case would most likely have been to the cognoscenti off-stage. Things went better the next night, as Macur vividly describes: "They... performed cleanly with emotion and resolve, as the crowd hushed. . . . And when their program was done, Fusar Poli fell to her knees. Margaglio, looking stronger, stood over her, his hands on her hips. When she rose, they fell into an embrace. They hugged, and he lifted her and twirled her around. She kissed him on the cheek. He kissed her, again and again. In the end, they finished eighth, but they were talking again. The crowd, now watching the most public kiss-and-make-up at the Olympics, began chanting, 'Italia!' "

[^6]: As I mentioned before, this is only one of several places where, as I shall indicate, Korsgaard shows a keen awareness of second-personal aspects of moral thought and interaction. Where Korsgaard and I may differ is over how fundamental a role the secondperson standpoint has in explicating the authority of moral obligation. This will become clearer in Chapters 9 and 10.
[^7]: It is consistent with this that our treatment of animals would be much better for all concerned if it involved much more mutual responsibility than is usual. On this, see Vicki Hearne's fascinating *Adam's Task: Calling Animals By Name* (1986). I am indebted here to Elizabeth Anderson.
[^8]: Perhaps some indirect evidence is the following. People who undergo stress (in timed mental arithmetic tests and extended immersion of a hand in cold water) exhibit lower pulse rates and systolic and diastolic blood pressure when in the presence of their pets than in the presence of their spouses. Might this be partly due to the fact that we are less likely to feel judged by other animals? See Allen, Blascovich, and Mendes 2001. Of course, I need take no view on whether there are other species capable of taking the second-person standpoint.

[^9]: I have been helped here by Vranas 2001.
[^10]: Here is an even more striking example. Recently, while running a road race, I saw someone wearing an Air Force Academy sweatshirt who was cheering on the runners. Recalling that I had gone to bed too early the night before to find out the score of a football game I was interested in between the Air Force Academy and Notre Dame, I called out as I ran past: "Who won?" Without missing a beat, he replied: "Notre Dame." Had he not put himself into my perspective, my interlocutor's most natural interpretation would have been: "Who won the race?" (The faster runners had already finished.)
[^11]: For some interesting papers on the relevance of simulation in the philosophy of mind, see Davies and Stone 1995; Goldman 1989, 1992; Gordon 1986, 1992.
[^12]: Adam Smith (1982b) and David Hume (1978), for example, use 'sympathy' primarily to refer to simulation (or fellow feeling resulting from simulation) and emotional contagion, respectively.
[^13]: I discuss different forms of empathy and sympathy in Darwall 1998.

[^14]: For the distinctive importance of this last element, along with an insightful discussion of the moral significance of empathy more generally, see Deigh 1995.
[^15]: See also the articles in Ko¨gler and Stueber 2000.
[^16]: Especially in Chapter 7. Emma Rothschild has pointed out to me many other examples of the importance of recognition in Smith. The "purpose of all the toil and bustle of this world," Smith writes, is "to be observed, to be attended to, to be taken notice of" (1982b: 50). The dismal lot of the poor man is that he "goes out and comes in unheeded" and is "out of sight of mankind" and "observed and attended to by nobody" (Smith 1976: 795). Rothschild notes that Smith uses the phrase "other people" eighty-four times in the *Theory of Moral Sentiments.* According to the InteLex database of philosophical texts (http://www.nlx.com) it appears forty-three times in *Wealth of Nations,* although no more than five times in, for example, Hume's *Treatise, Enquiries, Dialogues,* and *Essays* combined.
[^17]: For a reading of Smith that stresses this theme, see Fleischacker 2004a, 2004b; Rothschild 2001.
[^18]: Again, this is a theme of Darwall 2002b.

[^19]: It is an important point that dominance and submission have something of a second-personal look and feel, but don't presuppose any authority *de jure.* They don't even presuppose authority *de facto.* That would require the address to present itself as having authority *de jure,* whether it actually had it or not, and dominance doesn't require that. It is more like the position of a prize fighter who says, "What you gonna do about it?"
[^20]: It is worth pointing out that Smith's historical account of the institution of property and its civil protection is in no tension with thinking that exchange and property presuppose a second-personal infrastructure. Although you and I must presuppose reciprocal standing intelligibly even to negotiate a deal, we still face problems of determinate mutual assurance and expectations that only established formal practices and institutions can solve. In Chapter 8, we consider the fundamental difference between this idea and Hume's contention that just practices of property and promise can arise simply strategically, through mutually advantageous conventions. And in Chapter 7, we consider the second-personal human psychic mechanisms that make such cooperation possible. For Smith's views on the historical development of property institutions, see Smith 1976: 715 and 1982b. I am indebted here to discussion with Charles Griswold.

[^21]: In "Of the External Senses," Smith connects empathy to respect even in our interactions with other animals: "When he lays his hand upon the body either of another man, or of any other animal, though he knows, or at least may know, that they feel the pressure of his hand as much as he feels that of their body: Yet as this feeling is altogether external to him, he frequently gives no attention to it, and at no time takes any further concern in it than he is obliged to do by that fellow–feeling which Nature has, for the wisest purposes, implanted in man, not only towards all other men, but (though no doubt in a much weaker degree) towards all other animals. Having destined him to be the governing animal in this little world, it seems to have been her benevolent intention to inspire him with some degree of respect, even for the meanest and weakest of his subjects" (1995). I am indebted for this reference to Eric Schliesser.
[^22]: Falk wrote this as a response to emotivist and prescriptivist metaethical theories, which he thought were insufficiently insensitive to the distinction, assimilating guiding too much to goading.

[^23]: This is so even if it addresses second-personal demands. Cf. Kant on the public use of reason in "What Is Enlightenment?" in Kant 1996f: 17–22.
[^24]: See the discussion of Stalin in Chapter 6.
[^25]: See also Nozick 1969.
[^26]: Although illocutionary act kinds are defined conventionally, and not normatively, it is nonetheless the case that they normally purport to address genuine normative reasons.
[^27]: These are Austin's Γ.1 and Γ.2 (1975: 15).
[^28]: A similar view about the second-personal character of assertion lies behind Dummett's views on truth in Dummett 1990. I am indebted here to Rumfitt forthcoming.
[^29]: Even in the case of advice about second-personal reasons, although the reasons' existence is not independent of their being able to be addressed in making second-personal claims and demands, it is independent of the advisor's epistemic authority and knowledge.

[^30]: Of course, this case is also unlike advice in not presupposing even epistemic authority.
[^31]: There are, however, deep connections between the kind of competence and authority we presuppose in collaborative theoretical reasoning and holding people responsible in the moral sphere. Discovery and fact-finding are themselves part of the latter. Someone can answer or account for her conduct only by honestly seeking to discover and acknowledge the truth of what she did. And societies that have strong traditions and institutions of inquiry seem better able to sustain public accountability more generally, and vice versa.
[^32]: On the difference between epistemic authority and practical authority that includes the standing to command or demand, see Wolff 1970: 7.

[^33]: Williams's slogan was "Obligation out, obligation in" (1985: 181). One way of formulating the main thesis of Chapters 3 and 4—that moral obligation must be understood in terms of second-personal reasons—is to say that the formulation in the text is not just a paraphrase of Williams's slogan, but that the point it formulates is the genus of which that formulated by Williams's slogan is a species.
[^34]: It is also possible for someone to have second-personal theoretical authority by virtue of their competence in reasoning, quite independently of the credibility of their premises. But this isn't fundamentally second-personal either. I am indebted here to discussion with Jack Bender and Mark LeBar.
[^35]: In this connection, see Bernard Williams (1995) on the "proleptic" mechanism of blame.
