[^1]: My terminology derives, of course, from the grammatical second [person](dictionary.md#person). It thus differs from, although it is not totally unrelated to, the [use](dictionary.md#use) in Davidson 2001. More closely related is the genus of [addressed](dictionary.md#address) thought and [speech](dictionary.md#speech). But there are [forms](dictionary.md#form) of [addressed](dictionary.md#address) thought that do not seem to involve [claim](dictionary.md#claim) making.
[^2]: Austinian performatives [will](dictionary.md#will) be discussed in Chapter 3 and [reactive](dictionary.md#reactive) [feelings](dictionary.md#feeling) and [attitudes](dictionary.md#attitude) in Chapter 4.
[^3]: Throughout, except where [context](dictionary.md#context) makes clear, I [will](dictionary.md#will) be [referring](dictionary.md#refer) to *[normative](dictionary.md#normative) [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons)* rather than *motivating [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons),* that is, to [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) *to* do something, rather than whatever [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) someone actually [acts](dictionary.md#act) on or any motivational state that explains one's [act](dictionary.md#act) causally or teleologically. And I [will](dictionary.md#will) [follow](dictionary.md#follow) [ordinary](dictionary.md#ordinary) usage, according to which "give someone a [reason](dictionary.md#reason)" is a "success" phrase: X gives Y a [reason](dictionary.md#reason) to do A *[only-if](dictionary.md#only-if)* there is a [normative](dictionary.md#normative) [reason](dictionary.md#reason) for X to do A.

[^4]: I [will](dictionary.md#will) frequently [use](dictionary.md#use) "[address](dictionary.md#address) a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [reason](dictionary.md#reason)" as short for "purports to give an [addressee](dictionary.md#addressee) a ([second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal)) [reason](dictionary.md#reason) by [addressing](dictionary.md#address) a [demand](dictionary.md#demand) or [claim](dictionary.md#claim)." Strictly, it is the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) or [demand](dictionary.md#demand) that is [addressed](dictionary.md#address). As I shall [use](dictionary.md#use) the phrases, "[addresses](dictionary.md#address) a [claim](dictionary.md#claim) or [demand](dictionary.md#demand)" and, consequently, "[addresses](dictionary.md#address) a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [reason](dictionary.md#reason)" are not success phrases. Although if X [addresses](dictionary.md#address) a [claim](dictionary.md#claim) or [demand](dictionary.md#demand) to Y, X assumes or presupposes the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to make the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) or [demand](dictionary.md#demand) of Y, X may lack this [authority](dictionary.md#authority). In this case, although X purports to give Y a [reason](dictionary.md#reason) rooted in his [claim](dictionary.md#claim) (and so, in my terms, "[addresses](dictionary.md#address) the [reason](dictionary.md#reason)"), no [normative](dictionary.md#normative) [reason](dictionary.md#reason) is actually given. I am grateful to Mark Schroeder for pressing me to clarify these points.

[^5]: See the [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of Austin in Chapter 3. I am indebted here to Kevin Toh for clarifying the [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion).
[^6]: Hume supposes we are standardly led through [sympathy](dictionary.md#sympathy) to take [account](dictionary.md#account) of the welfare of others: "Would any man, who is walking along, tread as willingly on another's gouty toes, whom he has no quarrel with, as on the hard flint and pavement?" "Let us suppose such a [person](dictionary.md#person) ever so selfish; let private [interest](dictionary.md#interest) have ingrossed ever so much his [attention](dictionary.md#attention); yet in instances, where that is not concerned, he must unavoidably feel *some* propensity to the [good](dictionary.md#good) of mankind, and make it an [object](dictionary.md#object) of choice, if every thing else be [equal](dictionary.md#equal)" (Hume 1985: 225).
[^7]: On this point, see Bond 1983; Dancy 2000; Darwall 1983; Hampton 1998; Pettit and Smith 1990; Quinn 1991; and Scanlon 1998: 41–55.
[^8]: He would most likely [desire](dictionary.md#desire) this not just for its own sake, but for your sake as well. On the relevance of this latter, see Darwall 2002b.

[^9]: Agent-neutral [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) [contrast](dictionary.md#contrast) with agent-relative [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons), whose [formulation](dictionary.md#formulation) includes an ineliminable [reference](dictionary.md#reference) to the [agent](dictionary.md#agent) for whom they are [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) (like "that it [will](dictionary.md#will) keep a [promise](dictionary.md#promise) I made," "that it [will](dictionary.md#will) avoid [harm](dictionary.md#harm) to others [i.e., [people](dictionary.md#people) other than me]" and so on). Agent-neutral [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) can be stated without such a [reference](dictionary.md#reference): "that it would prevent some pain from [occurring](dictionary.md#occur) to someone (or some being)." On the distinction between agent-relative (also called "[subjective](dictionary.md#subjective)" or "agent-centered") and agent-neutral (also called "objective") [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons), [principles](dictionary.md#principle), [values](dictionary.md#value), and so forth, see Darwall 1986a; McNaughton and Rawling 1991; Nagel 1970, 1986; Parfit 1984; and Scheffler 1982. For a [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) that raises a question about the [value](dictionary.md#value) of this distinction, see Korsgaard 1996d.<br>I [argue for](dictionary.md#argue%20for) the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that sympathetic concern involves there seeming to be agentneutral [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) to further someone's welfare in Darwall 2002b: 68–72. I do not [deny](dictionary.md#deny), of course, that someone who already accepted various agent-relative [norms](dictionary.md#norm) might not be moved through empathy and [sympathy](dictionary.md#sympathy) to feel some special [responsibility](dictionary.md#responsibility) for relieving the pain. My point is that this would not come through [sympathy](dictionary.md#sympathy) alone.<br>Note also that there is an important difference between [sympathy](dictionary.md#sympathy) and empathy here. I am indebted to Nir Eyal for the [following](dictionary.md#follow): "A beggar looks at passers-by in the eye, and lets them see his obviously painful wound, which clearly requires [treatment](dictionary.md#treatment). He continues to look at them intently. His conduct may be read as a communication of something like 'Help me! You see I am in pain.' " Cases like this seem to be mixed, in my view, combining appeals to [sympathy](dictionary.md#sympathy) with [implicit](dictionary.md#implicit) ([second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal)) [claims](dictionary.md#claim). To the extent that there is an appeal with a continued [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) engagement that takes the passer-by into the afflicted [person's](dictionary.md#person) perspective, what we have is the [address](dictionary.md#address) of a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [claim](dictionary.md#claim).

[^10]: Note that superficially agent-relative [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) may be [grounded](dictionary.md#ground) more deeply in agentneutral [considerations](dictionary.md#consideration) and [values](dictionary.md#value), and/or vice versa. For example, rule-utilitarianism holds that [rules](dictionary.md#rules) of [right](dictionary.md#right) conduct include agent-relative [principles](dictionary.md#principle), such as those [defining](dictionary.md#define) [rights](dictionary.md#right) of [promise](dictionary.md#promise) and contract, on [grounds](dictionary.md#ground) of overall agent-neutral [value](dictionary.md#value).
[^11]: Just as might be [the case](dictionary.md#the%20case) if you were trying to get him to see [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) to [believe](dictionary.md#believe) that you were in pain. A grimace might [suffice](dictionary.md#suffice) without your having to [presume](dictionary.md#presume) any [authority](dictionary.md#authority) on the question.
[^12]: See the [references](dictionary.md#reference) in note 9.

[^13]: A [test](dictionary.md#test) for whether a given [reason](dictionary.md#reason) or [principle](dictionary.md#principle) is agent-relative or agent-neutral is to [consider](dictionary.md#consider) a case where it recommends someone's doing something and augment [the case](dictionary.md#the%20case) by [stipulating](dictionary.md#stipulate) that, as it happens, were the [person](dictionary.md#person) not to [perform](dictionary.md#perform) that [action](dictionary.md#action) (described in the relevant [reason](dictionary.md#reason)- or principle-sensitive way), it would bring about one other [person's](dictionary.md#person) doing an [action](dictionary.md#action) of the very same [kind](dictionary.md#kind). If the [reason](dictionary.md#reason) is agent-neutral, then it should make no difference whether the [agent](dictionary.md#agent) performs the [act](dictionary.md#act) without the other [person's](dictionary.md#person) doing so or forbears the [performance](dictionary.md#performance), thereby bringing about the other's [performance](dictionary.md#performance). If it does make a difference, then the [reason](dictionary.md#reason) or [principle](dictionary.md#principle) is agent-relative. "Don't tread on me" and "Don't tread on other [persons](dictionary.md#person)" do not [reduce](dictionary.md#reduce) to "Bring it about that [people](dictionary.md#people) are not tread upon."

[^14]: Suppose he rejects your request, enjoying being able to keep you under foot. Now you have an even weightier [claim](dictionary.md#claim). For now he is not simply causing you gratuitous pain, he is making you the [object](dictionary.md#object) of his sadistic [pleasure](dictionary.md#pleasure). And however much trouble we can legitimately put [people](dictionary.md#people) through to ensure they not step on our feet, we can certainly put them through more to prevent their sadistically victimizing us. I am indebted here to [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) with Marshall Weinberg.
[^15]: There are, of course, ways of [accepting](dictionary.md#accept) [demands](dictionary.md#demand), say out of self-interest in a negotiation, that are [different](dictionary.md#different) from [accepting](dictionary.md#accept) something as a [valid](dictionary.md#valid) [demand](dictionary.md#demand).

[^16]: The [formulation](dictionary.md#formulation) of the [reason](dictionary.md#reason) may not always be agent-relative, however. Suppose, for example, that the best way of [grounding](dictionary.md#grounding) the [categorical imperative](dictionary.md#categorical%20imperative) is, as I shall be [suggesting](dictionary.md#suggest), in an [authority](dictionary.md#authority) [persons](dictionary.md#person) [presuppose](dictionary.md#presuppose) when they [address](dictionary.md#address) one another [second-personally](dictionary.md#second-personally). It is at least conceivable that what the [categorical imperative](dictionary.md#categorical%20imperative) itself requires is a [principle](dictionary.md#principle) of conduct that can be specified agent-neutrally. R. M. Hare, for example, [believes](dictionary.md#believe) that the [categorical imperative](dictionary.md#categorical%20imperative) can be seen to [entail](dictionary.md#entail) the sort of [universal](dictionary.md#universal) [prescriptivism](dictionary.md#prescriptivism) he favors and that this [entails](dictionary.md#entail) a [form](dictionary.md#form) of act-utilitarianism (an agent-neutral [theory](dictionary.md#theory)). See Hare 1993.

[^17]: This would be like Hart's [interpretation](dictionary.md#interpretation) of Bentham's [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) in *A Fragment of Government* as involving "quasi-commands" rather than the [explicit](dictionary.md#explicit) commands of statute [law](dictionary.md#law). In such cases, Hart says, the command is taken to be [implicit](dictionary.md#implicit) in [acts](dictionary.md#act) of punishing. I [will](dictionary.md#will) be saying the analogous thing about [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [accountability](dictionary.md#accountability) (Hart 1990: 93–94). This analysis is the same as Strawson's on the [demand](dictionary.md#demand) [quality](dictionary.md#quality) of [reactive](dictionary.md#reactive) [attitudes](dictionary.md#attitude), which I discuss under "Strawson's Point" below and in Chapter 4 (Strawson 1968). I am indebted to Rae Langton and others for pressing me on these points and to Rob Kar and Kevin Toh for [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of Hart's view.
[^18]: For the [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that the [moral](dictionary.md#moral) point of viewis "[first-person](dictionary.md#first-person) [plural](dictionary.md#plural)," see Postema 1995. It is also a theme of Korsgaard's writings.

[^19]: They must be agent-relative, Nagel [believes](dictionary.md#believe), because they hold, for example, that it is [wrong](dictionary.md#wrong) to [harm](dictionary.md#harm) someone oneself, even if that is [necessary](dictionary.md#necessary) to prevent exactly [equivalent](dictionary.md#equivalent) [harm](dictionary.md#harm) by someone else. I am indebted here to [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) with Chris Dodsworth.
[^20]: See note 9.
[^21]: However, Korsgaard also apparently [believes](dictionary.md#believe) that [moral obligation](dictionary.md#moral%20obligation)s can be [grounded](dictionary.md#ground) in the constraints of [first-personal](dictionary.md#first-personal) deliberation alone. I [argue against](dictionary.md#argue%20against) this in Chapter 9.
[^22]: In Chapter 9, I discuss Korsgaard's deployment of Wittgenstein's private language [argument](dictionary.md#argument) in Korsgaard 1996e.
[^23]: See Joseph Raz's idea of a "[normative](dictionary.md#normative) [power](dictionary.md#power)" in Raz 1972. I am indebted to Gary Watson for this [reference](dictionary.md#reference).

[^24]: Thus, Michael Dummett remarks that the [right](dictionary.md#right) to command [entails](dictionary.md#entail) that "the *[right](dictionary.md#right)* to [reproach](dictionary.md#reproach) is an automatic [consequence](dictionary.md#consequence) of [disobedience](dictionary.md#disobedience)" (Dummett 1990: 9).
[^25]: "They who less seriously [consider](dictionary.md#consider) the force of words, do sometimes confound [law](dictionary.md#law) with *counsel*. . . . We must fetch the distinction between *counsel* and *[law](dictionary.md#law)*, from the difference between *counsel* and *command*. Now counsel is a *precept*, in which the [reason](dictionary.md#reason) of my [obeying](dictionary.md#obey) it is taken from *the thing itself* which is advised; but command is a *precept,* in which the cause of my [obedience](dictionary.md#obedience) depends on the *[will](dictionary.md#will) of the commander*. For it is not properly said, *thus I [will](dictionary.md#will)* and *thus I command,* except the [will](dictionary.md#will) stand for a [reason](dictionary.md#reason). Now when [obedience](dictionary.md#obedience) is yielded to the [laws](dictionary.md#law), not for the thing itself, but by [reason](dictionary.md#reason) of the adviser's [will](dictionary.md#will), the [law](dictionary.md#law) is not a *counsel,* but a *command,* and is [defined](dictionary.md#define) thus: [law](dictionary.md#law) *is the command of that [person](dictionary.md#person) (whether man or [court](dictionary.md#court)) whose precept contains in it the [reason](dictionary.md#reason) of [obedience](dictionary.md#obedience):* as the precepts of [God](dictionary.md#god) in regard of men, of magistrates in [respect](dictionary.md#respect) of their [subjects](dictionary.md#subject), and universally of all the powerful in [respect](dictionary.md#respect) of them who cannot resist, may be termed their [laws](dictionary.md#law)" (Hobbes 1983: XIV.1; see also Hobbes 1994: XXV). In my view, failure to observe this distinction infects Joseph Raz's [account](dictionary.md#account) of [authority](dictionary.md#authority) in Raz 1986. See also note 29.

[^26]: Of course, these further constraints are frequently in the background, as they are, for example, whenever we do philosophy, say, [right](dictionary.md#right) now. Because of the relationship you and I are currently in, each of us does have [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to call the other to [account](dictionary.md#account) for logical errors, a [standing](dictionary.md#standing) that, without some such [context](dictionary.md#context), we lack. But however frequently that or some relevantly similar [context](dictionary.md#context) obtains, the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) comes not just from the requirement of [reason](dictionary.md#reason), but also from some other [presupposed](dictionary.md#presuppose) feature of the [context](dictionary.md#context).
[^27]: I am indebted to Peter Graham for this way of putting the [contrast](dictionary.md#contrast).
[^28]: Although not, of course, its being what we morally must do (are morally required to do), since this is what [members](dictionary.md#member) of the [moral](dictionary.md#moral) community have the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to [demand](dictionary.md#demand) we do.

[^29]: As I [mentioned](dictionary.md#mention) in note 25, Raz argues (1986) that the species of [authority](dictionary.md#authority) with which we are concerned, for example, political [authority](dictionary.md#authority), can be [grounded](dictionary.md#ground) in epistemic [authority](dictionary.md#authority). But as Nomy Arpaly has put it to me, "Just because I knowmore than you doesn't make me boss." Thomas Jefferson makes a similar point, when he says, "Because Sir Isaac Newton was superior to others in [understanding](dictionary.md#understand), he was not therefore lord of the [person](dictionary.md#person) or [property](dictionary.md#property) of others" (Jefferson 1984: 1202). I am indebted to Charles Griswold for this [reference](dictionary.md#reference). Raz's viewdeserves a more careful [treatment](dictionary.md#treatment) than I can provide here, which I [intend](dictionary.md#intend) to provide on another [occasion](dictionary.md#occasion).
[^30]: I am indebted to Elizabeth Anderson for this [reference](dictionary.md#reference).

[^31]: D'Arms and Jacobson [argue](dictionary.md#argue) that this poses a problem for response-dependent or, as they call them, "neo-sentimentalist" [accounts](dictionary.md#account) of various [evaluative](dictionary.md#evaluative) and [normative](dictionary.md#normative) [notions](dictionary.md#notion), since it shows that, say, the funny can't be understood in terms of amusement's making [sense](dictionary.md#sense) or being warranted by just any [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons). There is a distinction between an [emotion](dictionary.md#emotion) or [attitude's](dictionary.md#attitude) being "the [right](dictionary.md#right) way to feel" and its "getting [the relevant [value](dictionary.md#value)] [right](dictionary.md#right)." See also D'Arms and Jacobson 2000b. For an excellent [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of howwhat they call "fitting-attitude" (or "FA") analyses can deal with the problem of distinguishing [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) of the [right](dictionary.md#right) from [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) of the [wrong](dictionary.md#wrong) [kind](dictionary.md#kind), see Rabinowicz and Ronnøw-Rasmussen 2004. (See also Olson 2004.) I am indebted to Julian Darwall for [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of this general [issue](dictionary.md#issue) and to Joe Mendola for a question that helped me to see that Strawson's Point is an instance of it.

[^32]: Rabinowicz and Ronnøw-Rasmussen express essentially the same point by saying [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) of the [right](dictionary.md#right) [kind](dictionary.md#kind) also appear in the content of the [attitude](dictionary.md#attitude) for which they are [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons): the [attitude](dictionary.md#attitude) is toward something "on [account](dictionary.md#account) of" these [reasons](dictionary.md#reasons) (2004: 414). As W. D. Falk pointed out, a favoring that is relevant to [value](dictionary.md#value) is "by way of [true](dictionary.md#true) comprehension of what [the [object](dictionary.md#object)] is like" (1986: 117).
[^33]: [Compare](dictionary.md#compare) Prichard's [objection](dictionary.md#objection) to attempts to vindicate [morality](dictionary.md#morality) and [moral obligation](dictionary.md#moral%20obligation) in terms of self-interest in Prichard 2002.
[^34]: Gary Watson stresses this (1987: 263, 264). Note also R. Jay Wallace: "there is an essential connection between the [reactive](dictionary.md#reactive) [attitudes](dictionary.md#attitude) and a [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [form](dictionary.md#form) of [evaluation](dictionary.md#evaluation)... that I [refer](dictionary.md#refer) to as holding a [person](dictionary.md#person) to an expectation (or [demand](dictionary.md#demand))" (1994: 19). See also Bennett 1980; Scanlon 1998: 272–290.

[^35]: "Having [rights](dictionary.md#right), of course, makes [claiming](dictionary.md#claim) [possible](dictionary.md#possible); but it is [claiming](dictionary.md#claim) that gives [rights](dictionary.md#right) their special [moral](dictionary.md#moral) significance. This feature of [rights](dictionary.md#right) is connected in a way with the customary rhetoric about what it is to be a [human being](dictionary.md#human%20being). Having [rights](dictionary.md#right) enables us to 'stand up like men,' to look others in the eye, and to feel in some [fundamental](dictionary.md#fundamental) way the [equal](dictionary.md#equal) of anyone" (Feinberg 1980: 151). [Compare](dictionary.md#compare) Mill: "To have a [right](dictionary.md#right), then, is, I conceive, to have something which society [ought](dictionary.md#ought) to defend me in the possession of" (1998: ch. 5).
[^36]: I am indebted to Mark LeBar for reminding me of Hohfeld's relevance here.
[^37]: Hohfeld sets out the "jural [correlatives](dictionary.md#correlative)" between [persons](dictionary.md#person) as [follows](dictionary.md#follow): (1) S has a [right](dictionary.md#right) against T *[if-and-only-if](dictionary.md#if-and-only-if)*, T has a [duty](dictionary.md#duty) to S; (2) S has a [power](dictionary.md#power) with [respect](dictionary.md#respect) to T *[if-and-only-if](dictionary.md#if-and-only-if)*, T has a [liability](dictionary.md#liability) with [respect](dictionary.md#respect) to S; (3) S has an [immunity](dictionary.md#immunity) with [respect](dictionary.md#respect) to T *[if-and-only-if](dictionary.md#if-and-only-if)*, T has a [disability](dictionary.md#disability) with [respect](dictionary.md#respect) to S; and so on (1923: 65–75).

[^38]: See Thompson 2004. Also, [compare](dictionary.md#compare) here Locke's famous distinction between the [right](dictionary.md#right) every [individual](dictionary.md#individual) has in the state of [nature](dictionary.md#nature) to punish transgressions of [natural](dictionary.md#natural) [rights](dictionary.md#right) and victims' [rights](dictionary.md#right) "to seek reparation." Both are [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal), and both are held as [members](dictionary.md#member) of the [moral](dictionary.md#moral) community, but only the latter involves a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [address](dictionary.md#address) on behalf of the victim (Locke 1988: II, §7–11).<br>As I've [mentioned](dictionary.md#mention) and shall stress more strongly in the next chapter, someone's being under a [moral obligation](dictionary.md#moral%20obligation) not to step on your foot also [entails](dictionary.md#entail) a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [authority](dictionary.md#authority) (in this case, of the [moral](dictionary.md#moral) community). What is [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) in [the case](dictionary.md#the%20case) of [rights](dictionary.md#right) is the [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [authority](dictionary.md#authority) of the [right](dictionary.md#right) [holder](dictionary.md#holder), including to [demand](dictionary.md#demand) compensation, as is [implicit](dictionary.md#implicit) in Locke's distinction between the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to punish (as a [member](dictionary.md#member) of the [moral](dictionary.md#moral) community) and the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to [demand](dictionary.md#demand) compensation (as the right-holding victim).

[^39]: Hart notes that he is here broadly [following](dictionary.md#follow) Kant's [doctrine](dictionary.md#doctrine) in the *Rechtslehre* (Kant 1996c: 230–231). We [will](dictionary.md#will) [consider](dictionary.md#consider) a further [expression](dictionary.md#expression) of this idea in Fichte's [claim](dictionary.md#claim) that a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) stance presupposes a "[principle](dictionary.md#principle) of [right](dictionary.md#right)" ("I must in all cases [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) the [free](dictionary.md#free) being outside me as a [free](dictionary.md#free) being, i.e., I must limit my [freedom](dictionary.md#freedom) through the [concept](dictionary.md#concept) of the [possibility](dictionary.md#possibility) of his [freedom](dictionary.md#freedom)") (2000: 49).
[^40]: I am indebted here to [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) with Tom Hurka.
[^41]: However, Hart sometimes seems to restrict [obligations](dictionary.md#obligation) even further to those that are voluntarily [assumed](dictionary.md#assume) or created (1965: 179n). I am indebted here to Rob Kar.

[^42]: These are, more strictly, [presuppositions](dictionary.md#presupposition) of their [address](dictionary.md#address) and acknowledgment, respectively, in the [sense](dictionary.md#sense) [mentioned](dictionary.md#mention) earlier in the chapter. The [individuals](dictionary.md#individual) themselves might not [accept](dictionary.md#accept) or even reject them. I [will](dictionary.md#will) return to this point presently.
[^43]: Ultimately, I [argue](dictionary.md#argue), this competence amounts to Kant's "[autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy) of the [will](dictionary.md#will)": "the [property](dictionary.md#property) of the [will](dictionary.md#will) by which it is a [law](dictionary.md#law) to itself independently of any [property](dictionary.md#property) of the [objects](dictionary.md#object) of volition" (Kant 1996b: 441). Also, see Gibbard 1990: 68–82, on the psychology of norm-acceptance. We might still call such states [desires](dictionary.md#desire), but if so, we [will](dictionary.md#will) need nonetheless to [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) that they are "principle-dependent" rather than "object-dependent" [desires](dictionary.md#desire). For this distinction, see Rawls 2000: 45–48, 148–152.
[^44]: A similar idea seems at work in the writings of Emmanuel Le´vinas about encountering the "other," for example, Le´vinas 1969. I am indebted here to Rachana Kamtekar.<br>For an illuminating [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of the way in which, according to Le´vinas, encountering an other "face to face" involves a [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [demand](dictionary.md#demand) for [respect](dictionary.md#respect), see Putnam 2002.

[^45]: Published in 1796–97, just before Kant's *Rechtlehre.* See Frederick Neuhouser's very helpful introduction to Fichte 2000.
[^46]: Pufendorf 's Point resonates with Hart's distinction between being obliged (by force or [circumstance](dictionary.md#circumstance)) and being [obligated](dictionary.md#obligate) (1961: 6–8).
[^47]: On the significance of the [ability](dictionary.md#ability) to hold oneself [responsible](dictionary.md#responsible), see Westlund 2003. Cf. Kant's remark that "I can [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) that I am under [obligation](dictionary.md#obligation) to others only insofar as I at the same time put myself under [obligation](dictionary.md#obligation)" (1996b: 6:417).
[^48]: I am indebted to Eric Schliesser for pressing me on this point.
[^49]: This is, of course, a favorite theme of Hegel's in *The Phenomenology of [Spirit](dictionary.md#spirit)* (1977).

[^50]: See Neufeld 1951. For an [interesting](dictionary.md#interest) [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of the development of our [contemporary](dictionary.md#contemporary) [notion](dictionary.md#notion) of [responsibility](dictionary.md#responsibility) and associated [practices](dictionary.md#practice) of [legal](dictionary.md#legal) [accountability](dictionary.md#accountability), which argues that [courts](dictionary.md#court) were initially conceived of as sites of neutral and [reasoned](dictionary.md#reason) [adjudication](dictionary.md#adjudication) between parties who would otherwise exact or suffer vengeance, see Pound 1922: ch. 4. I am indebted to Randall Curren for this [reference](dictionary.md#reference) and for helpful [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion). See Chapter 4 below for a [discussion](dictionary.md#discussion) of the difference between the [desire](dictionary.md#desire) to retaliate or avenge and [reactive](dictionary.md#reactive) [attitudes](dictionary.md#attitude) as implicitly seeking [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition) or [respect](dictionary.md#respect).
