## 8. Interlude: Reid versus Hume on Justice (with Contemporary Resonances)

It will help to fill in our picture of second-personal aspects of cooperation and justice, and also set the stage for the constructive arguments of Part IV, if we pause at this point to consider Thomas Reid's critique of Hume's well-known claim that justice is an "artificial" or convention-based virtue and reflect on some contemporary implications of this critique. Hume famously argues that justice is conventional in the sense that it depends upon a self-interested agreement in intention among individuals, perhaps inexplicit, to regulate their conduct by certain rules (the rules of justice) so long as others do. In fact, Hume uses 'convention' to refer, in part, to such a set of shared intentions.[^1] Without a convention in this sense, he argues, nothing can be just or unjust. Neither, he claims, is there any intrinsic obligation to be just, even once rules of justice are established. The obligation to justice arises entirely from the usefulness of the convention. The "natural obligation" and "original motive to the establishment of justice" is a self-interested desire for the personal advantages that established practices of justice can bestow (Hume 1978: 498, 499). And the "moral obligation" to be just resides in a sentiment of approbation we feel by sympathy with the public interest that justice, as a rule, promotes (498–500).

It is important to Hume's analysis that the agreement that establishes rule-structured practices of property, promise, and contract is not itself any sort of promise or contract, explicit or implicit. Hume thinks that there can't really be any promises or contracts at this pre-conventional stage. But neither is any such explicit joint undertaking necessary, in his view. It is enough that individuals communicate to one another both their common interest in establishing practices of justice and their respective conditional intentions to follow the rules if others do. The agreement (or "convention") that results is not so much between the individuals as it is one that arises among them. It is a "coming together" of their individual wills.

Against these claims, Reid argues, first, that sentiments and motives related to justice emerge in normal human development without any "artificial" agreement no less than do those implicated in Humean "natural virtues" like benevolence. In effect, Reid sides with present-day explanations of cooperation and justice in terms of reactive attitudes (e.g., Fehr and Gächter's)[^2] as opposed to a Humean model that anticipates the "emergence of cooperation" or "reciprocal altruism" theories of Axelrod (1984) and Trivers (1971). Second, he claims that the idea of moral obligation is intrinsic to that of justice and is irreducible to justice's general usefulness (a version of Strawson's Point). And third, Reid argues that Hume's account misses key second-personal elements of justice, especially, the obligation to keep promises and contracts.[^3]

Reid's critique of Hume resonates with themes we briefly noted in Margaret Gilbert's ideas about the agency of "plural subjects" (1990, 1996b), as well as with Scanlon's well-known critique of practice-based accounts of the obligation to keep promises (1990, 1998: 295–327). Exploring the connections to Gilbert's work helps clarify the relation between the second-person and first-person plural standpoints. And developing the links with Scanlon's helps prepare the way for my claim that a second-personal vindication of moral obligation, dignity, and autonomy of the sort I advance in Chapters 10 and 11 can also provide a foundation for Scanlon-style contractualism, as I argue in Chapter 12.

Central to Reid's critique of Hume is a distinction that Reid makes between "operations of the mind" that are "solitary" in the sense of being able to "exist, and be complete, without being expressed" or "known to any other person," and "social" operations, which "cannot exist without being expressed by words and signs, and known to the other." Without social operations, Reid says, a person might still "think, and reason, and deliberate, and will." But "it would be impossible for him to put a question, or give a command, to ask a favour, or testify a fact, to make a promise or a bargain" (Reid 1969: 438). Social mental operations are, in our terms, second-personal.[^4]

### **Hume on Justice**

The main lines of Hume's theory of justice are well-known, so we can be relatively brief.[^5] Unlike "natural virtues" like benevolence and compassion, justice is socially useful (and therefore, Hume argues, morally virtuous), not instance by instance, but only in the aggregate; and not in every circumstance, but only in certain specifiable conditions—moderate scarcity and limited generosity—that, to be sure, characterize the main of human life. If goods or benevolence were in much greater supply than is usual or drastically scarce, justice would be either unnecessary or unavailing. And nothing is intrinsically admirable about the "cautious, jealous virtue" even when it is called for (Hume 1985b: 183). We approve of benevolence and compassion in themselves and regardless of their contexts, whereas with justice our approval derives from the fact that the "whole plan or scheme," the overall practice structured by the rules of justice, promotes the interests of all in normal human circumstances (1978: 497).[^6]

Were we to rely only on our own resources or on the goodwill of others, we would be left, although not perhaps in a Hobbesian state of nature, in a substantially less secure state than we can have with established practices that protect property and make promises, contracts, and the rule of law possible. Normally, human beings act to bring about some good to self or others: "The will exerts itself, when either the good or the absence of the evil may be attain'd by any action of the mind or body" (Hume 1978: 439, also 399). But though people act to benefit others as well as themselves, they naturally favor those who are near and dear (488). Without established rules of justice, we can have no warranted common expectations from friend, stranger, and foe alike to counter these natural human partialities.

The problem (at least, ultimately) is that rules of justice can play this role *only-if* it is possible for individuals to undertake actions that cannot themselves be justified either by private or by public benefits, however long-term. The first phenomenon will be familiar from Prisoner's Dilemma. The "whole plan or scheme" of justice can benefit all *only-if* the rules require individual sacrifice. Indeed, Hume writes, "it is easily conceived how a man may impoverish himself by a signal instance of integrity, and have reason to wish, that, with regard to that single act, the laws of justice were for a moment suspended in the universe" (1978: 497). But the same point applies to public benefit, as Hume appreciates. "A single act of justice is frequently contrary to public interest," as, for example, when a law, promise, or contract requires the restoration of "a great fortune to a miser, or a seditious bigot" (497).[^7] Without, however, individuals regulating themselves by rules of justice even when these require sacrificing long-term self-interest and public interest, the collective benefits of the "whole plan or scheme" cannot be achieved.

But how does Hume think it is possible for human beings to establish, sustain, and actually regulate themselves by rules of justice? Since the general benefits of established practices of justice are clear, there is no problem in understanding how individuals could want to live under rules of justice and, indeed, want to do whatever is necessary to see that they are established and generally followed. The problem is how to go from the desire that rules of justice be in good working order, or even from the desire to regulate conduct by them or accept them oneself if that is necessary for public or private benefit, or from, that is, the thought that any or all of these would be desirable, to actually accepting or regulating conduct by them. It should be clear that this is simply another version of Strawson's Point and an instance of the "wrong kind of reasons" problem. Considerations of the desirable are reasons of the wrong kind to justify claims of justice or to warrant anything as a norm of justice.

Hume's solution is that the rules can be established by a *convention,* "a general sense of common interest" in everyone's regulating conduct by the rules and a consequent general "resolution" or "agreement" to do so (1978: 490). Everyone sees the benefits for himself and those he cares about of widespread obedience to justice's rules, which understanding all then "express to one another" along with the "resolution" each has "of squaring his actions by [them], on condition that others will do the same" (490, 498). This is enough, Hume says, to give whoever has the "first opportunity" an adequate motive to perform an act of justice as "an example to others" (497), who are then likelier to follow the rules and become models themselves. So far, so good. The likely desirability (good) of establishing conventions of justice is a reason of the right kind for trying to establish them. "And thus justice establishes itself by a kind of convention or agreement" (497). But the issue is how to establish a convention in such a way that participants themselves can then act for reasons of justice, that is for reasons of the kind that are distinctively relevant to enforcing claims of property, promises, and contracts—in our terms, for the relevant second-personal reasons.

A Humean convention is a "coming together" of individual wills, each resolving to follow the rules provided that others do too, in order to acquire the benefits of the cooperative endeavor of an established regime of justice.[^8] Hume's famous example of how it is possible for individuals to do this simply out of self-interest is that of "two men, who pull the oars of a boat by an agreement or convention, tho' they have never given promises to each other" (1978: 490). The convention, again, is simply the coincidence in their prudential conditional intentions to row so long as the other does. For this, it can be enough that they both want to get to the same place in the same boat.

We should note again explicitly, because it will be important later, that a Humean convention does not require anything like what we might more naturally call an "agreement" (either explicit or implicit) in what Margaret Gilbert calls the "everyday" sense in which, when two people agree to do something, they normally regard themselves as creating some resulting claim on one another, however weak.[^9] This is the sense in play, Gilbert (1990) argues, when, without anything as formal as a promise, people decide to do something, like take a walk, together. Doing something by agreement in this more robust sense is more like Smithian exchange. It involves at least an implicit invitation and acceptance in a second-personal space in which both parties understand the normative context. Both must presuppose that neither may simply force or rescind the agreement unilaterally and that each will have some resulting reason, however defeasible, to honor it, and to object, if the other doesn't.

Of course, two people might row a boat together as the result of an agreement of this kind also, but Hume's point is that they need not.[^10] Nothing second-personal is required. Without even implicit communication of the sort necessary for an "everyday" agreement, two people for whom it is common knowledge that both want to get from one shore to the other can simply approach the same rowboat, pick up a salient oar, begin to row, and not stop until they reach the opposite shore. If one or the other wants at any time to take a break, she can stop rowing, with some confidence that the other will likewise stop, and resume at whatever time it is mutually convenient, remaining confident that, since both want to get across, that will be sooner rather than later. Of course, things may not be so simple.

The same features are present in iterated Prisoner's Dilemma where tit-for-tat or some more complex strategy is evidently better for both players, both collectively and individually, than the non-cooperative strategy that dominates in a one-shot Prisoner's Dilemma (Axelrod 1984). In fact, rowing until the other stops and stopping until the other rows just is tit-for-tat. Hume's view is that the situation facing individuals who have not yet established practices of justice will be substantially the same from the "first opportunity" for compliance. If it is common knowledge that it is in everyone's interest that justice be established, then the situation is relevantly similar to that of two people approaching a boat that can take them both to the opposite shore. Perhaps the first complier takes more of a risk than someone does in making incipient rowing motions. Nevertheless, so long as she is in a position to survey others' future compliance and to withdraw her compliance if others do, and so long as that is sufficiently evident and of sufficient concern to others, this may be similar enough to the rowing case and iterated Prisoner's Dilemma to make it sensible for individuals to comply with rules of justice in their own interest.

But Hume acknowledges that this reasoning can work only on a relatively small scale. When society becomes sufficiently "numerous," the interests at stake are "more remote; nor do men so readily perceive, that disorder and confusion follow upon every breach of these rules" (1978: 499).[^11] At this point, people can no longer rely on the general sense that individual violations put the "whole plan or scheme" at risk. With large enough numbers, therefore, self-interest is no longer an adequate motive to justice. Self-interest continues to recommend acting justly when this is necessary to sustain the practice, but when it isn't, and when the gains to self are sufficiently great, it recommends that one act unjustly.

We should note, again, that the same point holds for benevolence of any form, however partial or universal. Once numbers are sufficiently large, and the connection between individual violations and the health of the practice is sufficiently remote, then concern for the welfare of particular individuals, or groups, or even for everyone's welfare, can likewise recommend injustice. "Donating" a seditious bigot's property to Oxfam may, if kept sufficiently secret, better advance the overall welfare even when due account is taken of its effect on practices of justice. In such a case, universal benevolence recommends injustice rather than justice. And it seems clear that for benevolent motives targeted on groups of whatever size or character, similar examples could be found.

It follows that when rules of justice are meant to bind together sufficiently large groups, neither self-interest nor any sort of benevolence can provide the necessary bond. It is at this point, Hume believes, that a moral obligation to be just must come into play. However, if matters have been relatively straightforward to this point, they now begin to get very complicated, for two chief reasons. One is that Hume's is a virtue ethics; consequently what he generally calls "moral obligation" is a sentiment of approbation or disapprobation whose object is never, in the first instance, an act, but always some motive or trait of character of which an act is, at best, a "sign." "When we praise any actions, we regard only the motives that produced them, and consider the actions as signs or indications of certain principles in the mind and temper" (Hume 1978: 477).[^12] The second is that what makes justice an artificial virtue in Hume's view is precisely that there is no "natural" motive (e.g., neither selfinterest nor benevolence of any kind) that invariably recommends justice. So the question arises, if moral obligation consists in or rests on the moral sentiment, and if the moral sentiment takes motives or traits as its proper objects and is directed toward acts only as signs of these, then what is the motive or trait of justice? In other words, which motive is the object of the approbation in which the obligation to justice consists?

The answer cannot be self-interest precisely for the reason we have just seen; when the numbers are sufficiently large, self-interest no longer invariably recommends justice. But neither can it be any sort of benevolence for a reason of the very same kind. Of course, Hume might argue, as Hobbes has sometimes been interpreted in his response to the fool, that since the stakes of having well-functioning practices of justice are so large, and since people are notoriously so bad at knowing when their actions will actually have deleterious effects on the practice (or their own reputation), the correct self-interested strategy is never to violate the rules of justice (Hobbes 1994: XV.4; Kavka 1995). And a similar argument might be made from benevolence, either partial or universal. But although these strategies are logically open, they don't seem to be Hume's.

In his reply to a "sensible knave" who questions what reason there is to be just when it is not advantageous, Hume does point out that even the most careful knave risks being hoisted by his own petard.[^13] (1985b: 283). But Hume also says that the knave's challenge cannot adequately be met in its own (self-interested) terms: "If a man think, that this reasoning much requires an answer, it will be a little difficult to find any, which will to him appear satisfactory and convincing. If his heart rebel not against such pernicious maxims, if he feel no reluctance to the thoughts of villainy or baseness, he has indeed lost a considerable motive to virtue." This says that self-interest is by itself an inadequate motive to justice and that it requires supplementation by moral disapprobation of injustice. Hume ends his response, moreover, by saying that the knave misses the greatest satisfactions in life, which involve moral approbation: "the invaluable satisfaction of a character" and "peaceful reflection on one's own conduct" (283). This means that, if justice ends up coinciding with self-interest, it is only because moral reflection on one's own just motives and character closes the gap. But if that is so, the motive of justice of which moral sentiment approves cannot itself be self-interest, since, without the gap being closed already by moral approbation, selfinterest does not invariably recommend justice.

Before we return to considering what Hume thinks is the motive of justice, we should note a fundamental difference between what Hume means by 'moral obligation' (the moral sentiment), on the one hand, and second-personal reactive attitudes as these figure in moral accountability, on the other. This can be obscured by Hume's frequent use of 'blame' as a synonym for disapprobation and his discussion of a kind of responsibility in relation to freedom of the will. I cannot discuss these topics adequately here, but, as I noted briefly in comparing Hume to Smith at the end of the last chapter, approbation and disapprobation for Hume are *third-personal* responses rather than second-personal reactive attitudes like resentment, as it figures in Smithian judgments of justice, or indignation or second-personal blame.[^14] Hume does frequently use the word 'blame,' as I've said, but it is clear that he doesn't have anything essentially second-personal in mind, since he speaks of blame for involuntary flaws and famously criticizes the distinction "usual in all systems of ethics" between moral virtues and vices and natural abilities and disabilities.[^15] And although he thinks that moral evaluation involves attributing a kind of responsibility, it is one concerned with identifying "durable and constant" traits of character as a solid basis for esteem rather than with second-personal moral accountability as we have been conceiving it (1985a: 98).[^16]

So what, then, does Hume think is the motive of justice? One possibility, which I have explored elsewhere and that is suggested by various passages, is that Hume supposes that the trait of justice involves accepting rules of justice as valid norms.[^17] And moral approbation of justice consists in approval of this trait.[^18]

This proposal supplies a motive for moral sentiment to approve of and reasons of the right kind to be just, but there are several reasons, rooted in deep philosophical commitments of Hume's, why he cannot easily accept it. But so much the worse, I'm inclined to think, for Hume's framework. The tensions are these: First, if someone accepts rules of justice as valid norms, then she will think she has normative reasons to do something simply because it would be unjust not to (or because it would violate the norm). But this means that the idea that the moral obligation to justice consists in an approval of the trait or motive of justice gets things backwards. The trait of justice of which we approve involves already taking justice as intrinsically obligating.[^19]

Second, on Hume's official view, as we have seen, voluntary action seeks to bring about some good (Hume 1978: 439, also 399). This is a source of the contemporary "Humean" theory of motivation, according to which action always results from desires (which have some apparently good [desirable] state of the world as object). As we noted in the last chapter, however, normative acceptance is irreducibly attitude-of-asubject-regarding rather than state-of-the-world-regarding. In accepting a norm of justice requiring me to restore a seditious bigot's property, I take there to be a reason for doing so that cannot be reduced to a reason for (desiring) the existence of any state, even the state of the money's being returned. Perhaps the world would be a better place if the money went to Oxfam; that might be a more desirable state of affairs. And even if I think that a property-restoring act's being done is a better state, the reason I will credit in accepting a norm of justice requiring me to restore the property will differ from any deriving from (or consisting in) the value of that state. Imagine, again, that I can bring about more such valuable states by the shocking spectacle of violating the norm myself thereby causing, say, two other would-be violators not to go through with their previously intended violations. The (agent-relative, second-personal) reasons for acting that derive from a norm of property would not recommend that I do so. Reasons for action cannot, in general, be reduced to reasons to desire states, and, in particular, a reason of justice to return a seditious bigot's property cannot be. Or so someone who has the motive of justice must think if she is to regulate her conduct in the way she must for a whole plan or scheme to be collectively beneficial. But, again, this conflicts with Hume's general theory of motivation.

Finally, were Hume to accept the suggestion, it would open a yawning gap in his account of how the rules of justice are established. In Hume's story, individuals recognize that it is in their common interest if everyone follows the rules of justice, and they communicate this sense to one another. Suppose, however, that the rules of justice will be established in a sufficiently large society *only-if* enough people actually accept the rules as binding norms. This will then support a desire in each individual that enough people so accept the rules. But this recognition and desire cannot itself directly motivate acceptance of the rules as valid norms of justice in any individual. It provides a reason of the wrong kind. Suppose that you are convinced that beneficial rules of justice will be established *only-if* you accept the rules as valid norms of justice. You then have a reason of the right kind to want to be someone who accepts the rules as valid norms, but not yet a reason of the right kind actually to accept the norms as norms of justice. You cannot accept the norms for this reason.

This, again, is a consequence of Strawson's Point and another instance of the "wrong kind of reason" problem. I might want to be someone who believes that things are getting better in the world, but that fact and my reasons for wanting to be optimistic can't give me a reason of the right kind for thinking that the world isn't going to hell in a handbasket.[^20] Or I might want to be someone who isn't afraid of flying, but the reasons to which that desire responds do not speak to my fear. Similarly, I might think it would be better (and so want) to accept the rules of justice as norms of action. But to do that I must accept certain agent-relative, second-personal practical reasons. And I can't do that simply on the grounds that it would be better for me, or even for society, to do so.

### **Reid's Critique of Hume on Justice**

We come now to Reid's critique of Hume's conventionalist account of justice. Reid concedes that a "conception of the virtue of justice" is impossible until people "have lived some time in society," but he denies that this shows that justice is conventional, since reason itself depends on development and maturation within a social context (1969: 405). In any case, Reid argues, the sense of justice arises simultaneously with the capacity for moral judgment in general. And this sense already involves, moreover, the apprehension of "an obligation to justice, abstracting from the consideration of its utility" (406).

As evidence of these claims, Reid cites the fact that the concepts of *favor* and *injury* come with normal human (social) development, independently of Humean conventions, and that these concepts presuppose those of justice and injustice. The very idea of a favor is of an intentional benefit that goes beyond anything its beneficiary has the standing to expect or demand as her just due. And the notion of an injury is of a harm that violates a norm of justice.[^21] It is one thing to see ourselves as benefited or harmed by others, even intentionally, and another to regard another's act as a favor or injury. The latter only makes sense in relation to warranted expectations that Reid collects under the concept of justice. What justice requires and allows, as he puts it, "fills up the middle ground between these two" (1969: 410).

Reid explicitly connects these notions, moreover, to (second-personal) reactive attitudes: "A favour naturally produces gratitude. An injury done to ourselves produces resentment; and even when done to another, it produces indignation" (1969: 410).[^22] Before we have the concepts of favor and injury, we can, of course, be pleased when we are benefited, especially so when it is intentional, and displeased when we are harmed. To have the concept of a favor or injury, however, we must have some notion of what we can warrantedly expect or demand from others. Favor and injury are thus second-personal concepts. They concern our standing to have expectations and make demands of one another and are connected to second-personal responses that presuppose this authority. As Strawson points out for negative reactive attitudes like resentment, "the making of the demand *is* the proneness to such attitudes," and, we might add, vice versa (1968: 92–93).[^23]

Reid also anticipates Strawson's Point. To see something as an injury, Reid observes, it is necessary to "have the conception of justice, and perceive its obligation distinct from its utility" (1969: 406). Regarding something as required by justice "carries inseparably along with it, a perception of its moral obligation" (413). It is inconceivable, therefore, that the distinctive sentiments of justice could arise simply through a mutually advantageous convention.

### **Reid's Critique of Hume on Promises**

Among the most interesting of Reid's criticisms for our purposes are those he makes of Hume on the obligation to keep promises. Hume's account of promising is notoriously byzantine,[^24] and it would take us too far afield to attempt to master all its intricacies. Suffice it to say that although Hume sensibly understands promising to involve the voluntary undertaking of an obligation ("the willing of that obligation, which arises from the promise"), his moral psychology and virtue ethics require that the obligation be understood via the moral sentiment's role in an individual's psychic economy (1978: 517). Against this, Reid points out that the ideas of promise and its resulting obligation are essentially social, they are *to* others, and, therefore, involve "social operations of the human mind"; in our terms, second-personal psychic mechanisms, must be involved. Neither, Reid argues, can the obligation to keep promises depend on the usefulness of a conventional social practice of promising, as Hume supposes is true of the moral obligation to justice generally, since children are capable of understanding, and naturally accept, the basic fairness and reciprocity involved in keeping faith long before they have any conception of its social utility (1969: 444).

Reid stresses throughout the necessity of a pre-conventional, second-personal form of reciprocal obligation that individuals must already implicitly recognize in order for them to come to have genuine conventional obligations at all. For this point, it doesn't much matter whether or not we reserve the words 'promise' and 'contract' for undertakings that require specific conventional contexts. If we do, then the point will still remain that we could not come to have the conventionally established obligations of promise and contract unless we were capable of the preconventional second-personal obligations that make conventional obligations generally possible in the first place. Suppose we reserve 'promise' for a conventionally defined obligation that is undertaken with tokens of 'promise' and its synonyms, and we reserve 'contract,' for those that require as context the law of contract. So defined, promise and contract will be essentially conventional, and whatever distinctive obligations they carry will depend in some way on their respective conventional contexts. They will depend, as Hume puts it, on a certain "form of words" and therefore on employing "symbols and signs instituted" by "the conventions of men" (1979: 522). However, if Reid is right, these will nonetheless also depend on the possibility of voluntarily undertaking second-personal obligations that are not conventional. To anticipate, it must be possible for individuals to create binding conventions by a kind of agreement that is itself neither conventional (in the usual sense) nor simply a coordination of self-interested conditional intentions, as in Hume's boat-rowing example or in iterated Prisoner's Dilemma.

Reid faults Hume for failing to grasp promising's "social" or second-personal character. Commanding, testifying, requesting, bargaining, and promising are all irreducibly "social": "they cannot exist without being expressed by words or signs, and known to the other party." It is impossible, moreover, "to resolve" social operations "into any modification or composition of the solitary" (1969: 438). (This, we should note in passing, is a consequence of the circle of irreducibly second-personal concepts that we described in Chapter 1.[^25]) It is consequently impossible to understand promising in terms of such "solitary" Humean mental acts as "willing an obligation" (understanding 'obligation' as Hume does) or as the expression of "a resolution of performing" the promised act (Hume 1978: 518, 517).

Additionally, even if the distinctive forms that contract and promise take in established practices depend on "human invention," these nonetheless presuppose a second-personal sociality that makes conventional practices possible in the first place. Reid makes a similar claim about language. No doubt much of language is conventional also, but without a background of natural, nonconventional dispositions to respond second-personally, conventional linguistic discourse would be impossible: "This intercourse, in its beginning at least, must be carried on by natural signs, whose meaning is understood by both parties, previous to all compact and agreement. . . . The power which man has of holding social intercourse with his kind, by asking and refusing, threatening and supplicating, commanding and obeying, testifying and promising," cannot be human invention, but must rather be a distinctive "part of our constitution, like the powers of seeing and hearing" (1969: 439).

Contemporary epistemological discussion has drawn from related Reidian claims about *testimony* (Burge 1993; Coady 1992; Foley 1994; Moran 2005).[^26] Reid argues that unless we are disposed to give others authority in theoretical reasoning by treating their testimony as providing reasons for belief that extend beyond any reasons others can themselves offer in support of what they say, our practices of reason-giving cannot get off the ground. This is a version of the point we noted from Pettit and Smith (1996) in Chapter 3. When we conduct serious "conversation of an intellectual kind," we must impute to one another a second-personal authority to give us reasons to believe things.[^27] Burge endorses an "acceptance principle" along what he presents as similar Reidian lines: "A person is entitled to accept as true something that is presented as true and that is intelligible to him, unless there are stronger reasons not to do so" (1993: 467).

Reid notes that "as soon as they are capable of understanding declarations," children "are led by their constitution to rely on them." And "they are no less led by constitution to veracity and candour, for their own part" (1969: 444). This rings true. Were children not naturally disposed to trust what they are told and to avow candidly their own beliefs, it is difficult to see how they could possibly be inducted into practices of theoretical reason-giving or even to learn a language. Of course, even if trust and veracity are natural defaults, that does not mean that this presumption cannot be defeated by a record of unreliable testimony. Indeed, it will be crucial to my argument later that second-personal theoretical authority is ultimately defeasible in this way and so different from the kind of authority we presuppose in addressing and acknowledging second-personal practical reasons. Nonetheless, even common inquiry must presuppose some presumptive (theoretical) authority.

Reid argues that the analogous points must hold also with practical trustworthiness. Fidelity must be the natural default in the practical realm no less than in the theoretical. Children naturally trust others' assurances about their future actions no less than what they say about other matters (Reid 1969: 444). It would be impossible, moreover, for us to make agreements, promises, and contracts, unless we already took ourselves to be accountable to one another and accorded each other the second-personal authority to undertake these distinctive obligations.[^28] Of course, violations of agreements or promises do not simply give the lie to declarations of future actions. They are distinct forms of injustice with their own characteristic remedies. If I agree or promise to do something, then I am obligated to make that happen in a way that I am not normally obligated to make what I assert true. I am obligated only to assert what is true, or what I believe to be true.

Again, it doesn't matter if we reserve 'promise' and 'contract' for distinctive conventionally defined methods of voluntarily undertaken second-personal obligations. Reid's point is that such conventional obligations will be possible *only-if* we can presuppose an authority to make claims of one another and undertake voluntary obligations at all that does not itself depend upon antecedent conventions. We can hear in Reid's words echoes of Smith on exchange:

> One boy has a top, another a scourge; says the first to the other, if you will lend me your scourge as long as I can keep up my top with it, you shall next have the top as long as you can keep it up. Agreed, says the other. This is a contract perfectly understood by both parties, though they never heard of the definition given by Ulpian or by Titius. And each of them knows, that he is injured if the other breaks the bargain, and that he does wrong if he breaks it himself. (Reid 1969: 437)[^29]

What Reid calls "contract" here is the sort of agreement in the "everyday" sense that Margaret Gilbert (1990) argues gives rise to plural subjects. When two individuals agree in this way, it is then possible for them to do something together, in the first-person plural.

Reid and Gilbert insist that agreements of this sort result in voluntarily assumed obligations to one another. Once the agreement has been made, each is obligated to do his part, unless released by the other.[^30] These obligations are thus second-personal. People who have made an agreement are obligated to one another not just in the sense that they have an obligation with respect to each other but in the further sense that they are accountable to each other. Failure to discharge the obligation gives the other grounds for second-personal reactive attitudes, such as resentment, and perhaps grounds for redress of some kind. Presently, we consider how it is possible for such second-personal obligations to arise voluntarily. Before we do so, however, we should note that if it is possible for obligations of justice to arise in this way, that would close the gap in Hume's account.

Hume says, recall, that individuals who lack conventions of justice can bring them into existence by communicating their common interest in regulating their conduct by its rules: "I observe, that it will be for my interest to leave another in the possession of his goods, *provided* he will act in the same manner with regard to me." When this is "mutually express'd" and common knowledge, "it produces a suitable resolution and behavior" (1978: 490). This may be enough to start a convention when numbers are sufficiently small, but it will be ineffective, again, when numbers grow larger. There is a point beyond which expressions of common interest will be insufficient to establish or sustain any convention to regulate by rules of justice, because, as we've seen, following the rules in individual cases will no longer invariably promote, or be seen to promote, individual and public interest.

If, however, the individuals could make an agreement in the "everyday" sense to follow the rules of property, promise, and contract, they could establish these rules by convention. To do so, each would not simply tell the other that it will serve his interests to follow the rules if others do. Rather, like the two boys in Reid's example or like Smithian barterers, one might propose that she follow the rules on the condition that others do so also, and others might accept this proposal. Assuming it possible to obligate themselves by a voluntary agreement in this way, all would then be obligated to one another to treat the rules as authoritative. The specific rules of property, promise, and contract would then be established by "a convention or agreement" that is "not in the nature of a promise"

(reserving 'promise' as Hume does for distinctive forms of second-personal assurance that involve "symbols and signs instituted" by "the conventions of men").[^31] But neither would it be the sort of coordinated prudential conditional intentions that Hume calls "convention." Rather, the agreement would be of the "everyday" kind that does not itself presuppose antecedently agreed rules.

### **Gilbert on Agreement and Obligation**

Of course, Hume was not prepared to take the possibility of everyday agreement for granted. So why should we? How, indeed, is it possible for individuals to obligate themselves to one another by an agreement? I believe that the answer is to be found in the presuppositions of second-personal engagement in general. Whenever someone addresses a second-personal reason of any kind, including just proposing an offered agreement for another's consideration (which itself involves the implicit address of a reason to consider), he presupposes that the other has the second-personal standing of a free and rational agent. He commits himself, as I argue in Chapter 10, to the equal dignity of persons, that is, to their common authority to make claims and demands of one another as mutually accountable equals. Even if each cannot be specially obligated to the other in the ways specified by the terms of their agreement until the agreement has actually been made, it is a presupposition of their mutual address that they are already obligated to one another in general as free and equal rational persons.[^32]

Recall the experiments we considered in the last chapter in which subjects play Prisoner's Dilemma after a conversation about whether or not to cooperate. In one setup, individuals showed a significantly enhanced ability to predict their interlocutors' plays (Frank 1988). In another, the amount of cooperation roughly doubled (Orbell, Dawes, and van de Kragt 1988, 1990). I speculated that we could explain these results if we notice the role of second-personal recognition in the experimental setup. The distinctive ability to determine another's sincerity in conversation about whether to cooperate involves, I claimed, sensitivity to reciprocal respect. Suppose someone tells you he will cooperate. Is he telling the truth? Is he really willing to do the collectively beneficial thing so long as you do? Or does he just want you to believe that he is? Well, if you are discussing whether to cooperate, the question really becomes, Is this a serious conversation? Is he discussing this question in earnest and giving you a second-personal authority, or is he simply going to decide what to believe and do unilaterally? If the latter, then not only will there be nothing reciprocal about his choice, but also there will be nothing genuinely reciprocal about the conversation; it will not be serious. He will have no particular need to determine what you are going to do, say, by listening carefully, because his choice will be unilateral. If he is an egoistic noncooperator, he will not cooperate whatever you say or do. He has nothing at stake in the conversation and need give you no authority in it, either to answer the theoretical question of what (to believe) you will do, or to answer the practical question of what to do himself. No genuine codeliberation, either theoretical or practical, will occur.[^33] I speculated that part of normal human social development involves the capacity to detect the presence or absence of reciprocal attention and, hence, of serious engagement.

Similarly, experimenters note that, in the second setup, which showed substantially increased cooperation, conversations about what to do frequently proceeded in the first-person plural, with subjects deliberating about what they ("we") would do collectively. This suggests that, in some cases at least, a genuine co-deliberation was going on that ended in an agreement to cooperate "together" in Gilbert's sense. If Gilbert is right, however, these conversations must have had a serious second-personal aspect. Two individuals can agree to do something together in Gilbert's sense only through interactions that are at least implicitly second-personal.[^34] For the decision to cooperate to constitute a Gilbertian agreement, there must be both invitation and uptake, if only implicitly (Gilbert 1990: 6–8). It would hardly be surprising that this would increase cooperation, since, as Gilbert points out, the cooperators would have appropriately felt some obligation to one another to comply with their agreement. The (second-personal) reasons to comply that any such obligation involves find no adequate representation in rational self-interest models, but according to those models, increased cooperation should not have occurred anyway. Even after serious conversation, the dominant selfinterested strategy is not to cooperate.

I believe that the capacity of individuals to make agreements and form plural subjects depends upon their already presupposing one another's second-personal standing in seriously addressing each other in the first place. So any resulting obligation depends both on what they presuppose, namely, that they both have the requisite authority, and on their addressing one another on terms that presuppose this. It is the terms of this standing as mutually accountable persons in general that then gives them the authority to obligate themselves especially to one another through the terms of their agreement.[^35]

The standing to make and be obligated by agreements at all is a second-personal authority that entails mutual accountability. This, again, is a consequence of Cudworth's Point (which is itself a version of Strawson's). Just as God cannot create by command the second-personal authority necessary to give his commands normative force, so also is it impossible for obligations to come from agreements all the way down. Unless you and I already have the authority to bind ourselves by an agreement, as we presuppose when we address one another, we cannot create a resulting obligation. Before you and I consummate an agreement to do something together, then, we are already obligated to one another as equal free and rational persons (as we presuppose in any serious conversation about whether to agree), although not yet specially obligated as we would be by a consummated agreement. The second obligation cannot be created without the existence already of the first. Again we see: "Second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in."

So far, this may seem just to get the parties into the space of the reasonable and mutual accountability. Their (presupposed) common second-personal authority is sufficient for that and necessary for them to bind themselves by an agreement. But it may seem that it is nonetheless not sufficient for a binding agreement. However, some demand of good faith has to be built into the very idea of second-personal authority, since that concerns address by its very nature.[^36] The very existence of the category depends on there being a distinction between serious representations or undertakings, on the one hand, and those that are not, on the other. But for that distinction to be maintained, individuals must be accountable to one another for the seriousness of their representations and undertakings; they must have a claim against one another that they not present themselves as making serious representations and undertakings when they are not (with, of course, the usual escape clauses about play, humor, irony, and so on). So if two parties present themselves as having a serious conversation about whether to agree to something and then agree, then both have a resulting claim that the agreement be kept. Both already had a claim that any address on the matter of whether to agree be in good faith. And since it is a presupposition of a serious conversation about whether to agree that the parties will be bound if they agree, then some claim actually to keep the agreement must follow also from their common authority to demand good faith.

### **Scanlon on Promising**

Another contemporary resonance of these and related points can be found in Scanlon's recent writings on the obligation to keep promises. As against the Humean claim that there is no obligation of promise-keeping outside of an established practice, Scanlon defends the Reidian thesis that promissory obligations do not require conventions (1990, 1998: 295–327). Scanlon's account may not, however, be sufficiently sensitive to the second-personal aspects of promising that Reid emphasizes.

Scanlon's explicit target is Rawls's view that the obligation to keep promises is an instance of the general requirement to do one's fair share in mutually advantageous practices (Rawls 1971: 344–350). He presents cases where there is no ongoing practice of promise-keeping and argues that it is possible in such cases for people to undertake to give one another assurances of future conduct that create obligations of fidelity, whether or not we choose to call such extra-conventional acts "promises." Scanlon's basic line of argument strikes me as largely successful, although less than it might be were it to be more sensitive to the second-personal character of promising, namely, that promises are forms of address that presuppose a second-personal authority of promiser and promisee.[^37]

Scanlon's argument depends on the claim that it would be unreasonable to reject *Principle F:*[^38]

> If (1) in the absence of objectionable constraint, and with adequate understanding (or the ability to acquire such understanding) of his or her situation, *A* intentionally leads *B* to expect that *A* will do *X* unless *B* consents to *A*'s not doing so; (2) *A* knows that *B* wants to be assured of this; (3) *A* acts with the aim of providing this assurance, and has good reason to believe that he or she has done so; (4) *B* knows that *A* has the beliefs and intentions just described; (5) *A* intends for *B* to know this, and knows that *B* does know it; and (6) *B* knows that *A* has this knowledge and intent; then, in the absence of special justification, *A* must do *X* unless *B* consents to *X*'s not being done. (245)

We may stipulate that these conditions are all satisfied in standard promises. Scanlon's claim is then that the wrongness of breaking promises is to be explained by the wrongness of violating Principle *F*. Unless, however, we interpret the idea of "providing assurance" in a second-personal way that already presupposes the authority of the assured to claim compliance, or assume, at least, that assurer and assured present themselves to one another as presupposing this in common, I doubt that this is so.

Consider, first, cases where one intentionally or negligently causes someone to expect that one will do something. Scanlon argues persuasively that in such cases the person whom one has led to have the expectation acquires a claim on one. If she has not yet relied on the expectation, then she has a claim to one's correcting the expectation if it is mistaken. And if she has relied on it, then she has some claim to compensation. But if she has not relied on the expectation, she has no claim that one fulfill the expectation, only that one correct any mistake in it. Promises are, of course, different. If one promises to do something and the other hasn't yet relied on an expectation that one will do it, one cannot simply disabuse her of the expectation if one wishes not to do what one promised. The other has a remaining valid claim to one's doing what one promised and not just to due notice of nonperformance or to compensation in the case of reliance.

Principle *F* attempts to capture this through a complex set of conditions connected to providing assurance. But this idea can be interpreted in two different ways. A *causal* interpretation of providing assurance would be: causing someone to be assured that something will happen, say, that one will do something. On a *second-personal* interpretation, however, providing assurance would involve an act of *assuring,* that is, a putatively claim-giving address to another of the same species as promise (maybe the very same thing as a promise).

Scanlon could avail himself of a second-personal interpretation of providing assurance without rendering Principle *F* idle. We know from the literature generated by Searle (1964) that it is one thing to show that the idea of promise cannot be understood except in terms of putative undertakings of obligation and another to establish that a genuinely binding obligation is created in fact.[^39] However, if we interpret providing assurance in causal terms, Principle *F* is not compelling.

To show this, we have to imagine a fairly elaborate case in which all of the conditions in *F* are satisfied. Suppose you want me to attend your party. If I were to promise to do so, then I would give you by that distinctive form of second-personal address a claim to my doing so; you would warrantedly expect this *of* me, and not just justifiably expect that I would do so. But suppose, first, that I simply intentionally cause you to expect that I will do so, say, by telling your friends that I will. In that case, if you have not relied on that expectation, I can discharge any claim you have of me by simply telling you in a timely fashion, before you rely on the expectation, that I am actually not going to come, if that is my intention. But again, that is not so if I promise or assure you that I will come. In that case, you will have a claim that cannot be discharged by telling you of my real intentions should I decide not to come, even if you have not yet relied on the expectation that I will come. But what if Principle *F* is satisfied with the various assurance conditions being interpreted in causal terms?

Suppose it is common knowledge between you and me that you have access to my email and that you check it regularly. (Let's not worry about why *that* would be!) On Monday, I send an email to a friend saying that I firmly intend to go to the party unless you wish me not to (the consent dimension of clause (1)), but that I will not promise or assure you myself, since I desire that, *were* I, counterfactually, to change my intention, you would have no remaining claim to my coming to the party. My complex desire for this extremely unlikely counterfactual situation notwithstanding, my firm intention is still to come to the party unless you wish otherwise. This satisfies clause (1). Since I know that you want to be assured that I will come unless you wish otherwise, (2) is satisfied. I send the message in order to cause you to be assured, and since I know you will read the message and, let us assume, believe it, I have good reason to believe that you will be thus assured. You believe of course that *were* I to change my mind I would not regard you as having any claim to my coming (therefore, that I am not *assuring you,* second-personally, that I will come), but you also believe that the probability that I will change my mind is negligible, so (3) is satisfied.

Suppose, then, that on Tuesday, I send a second email to my friend saying that because you have likely read and believed my first email, as I had hoped, you are therefore likely now to be assured that I will come to the party unless you wish me not to. Since you read this second message, you come thereby to know that I wrote the first message with the aim of causing you to be thus assured and that I believe you have been, so (4) is satisfied. Since I wrote the second message with the intention that you would read and believe it, and I know that you will read it, condition (5) is satisfied.

Suppose, then, that on Wednesday, I send a third email to my friend saying that because you have likely read and believed my second email, as I had hoped, you must now know that I had written the first with the intention of causing you to be assured and that I know that you have been. You read my third email, so you now know that I had this knowledge and intent; so condition (6) is satisfied.

Suppose now that I *do* change my mind and decide not to go to your party *and* that you have in no way yet relied on the expectation that I will go. You have, of course, a claim that I notify you of this in a timely fashion before you rely on it. But do you have a claim to my actually going unless you consent to my not going? It seems that you do not. After all, although I intentionally created in you the expectation that I would go, because I had a firm intention to do so, I also intentionally created in you the expectation that in the utterly unlikely instance that I were to change my mind, I would not in fact come nor regard you as having any claim to my coming. In the relevant respects, therefore, this seems to be like a case in which I intentionally create an expectation and in which you have a claim to compensation if you rely and to timely notice of my real intentions if I come to change them, but not to my actually doing what you had been led to expect if you have not yet relied on that expectation and if I have given you timely notice of my changed intention.

Even though conditions (1) through (6) are satisfied, then, it nonetheless seems that, if I have informed you otherwise and you haven't relied, you have no remaining claim to my actually coming to your party. I conclude that there is a case where it would not be wrong to violate Principle *F* on a causal interpretation. And although I have not directly argued that Principle *F,* interpreted causally, is one someone could reasonably reject, I hope it is reasonably clear that whether that is so or not, it's not being so would not explain why it is wrong to violate promises.

Promises have an essentially second-personal character that Principle *F* cannot capture when it is interpreted in causal terms. It is part of the very idea of a promise or an assurance that the addresser gives the addressee to understand that she thereby has a claim to the addresser's following through. Moreover, when I promise or assure someone that I will do something, I must already be authorizing the other to presuppose that she and I share a second-personal authority to make claims of, and be accountable to, one another. In this last section, I have been arguing that Principle *F* is impotent to explain the wrongness of breaking promises unless we interpret it in second-personal terms.

The lesson, I believe, is that the obligations of promise-keeping have an essentially second-personal character that cannot be fully accounted for outside the second-person standpoint. There is no way to construct the distinctive claims and authority over ourselves that we can give to another by a second-personal assurance out of non-second-personal materials, for example, by reckoning benefits and harms our actions have caused and obligations that derive from these. Here again, "second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in."[^40]

The need to explain the distinctive forms of accountability involved in promising gives us a glimpse of a point discussed in Chapter 12. A contractualist theory of moral obligation, like Scanlon's, must seek to link norms that no one can reasonably reject to mutual accountability in the right way. Justification to one another as mutually accountable equals is a fundamental idea in the contractualist framework. But what commits us to this idea? Not all rational justification is to others in the way that the mutual accountability of contractualist morality requires. Rational thought is frequently and appropriately solitary rather than social, in Reid's sense. It is true that most human beings have a desire to be able to justify themselves to one another, at least in certain areas of their lives (Scanlon 1982). And it is true also that mutual accountability is an ineliminable aspect of relations, like friendship, that most of us value highly (1998: 148–168). But as important as these facts are, they give us reasons of the wrong kind for thinking that we actually are accountable to one another in the way contractualism supposes. They ground no authority to make claims and demands of one another. This, again, is Strawson's Point. In Chapter 12, I argue that contractualism cannot have the foundations it requires, therefore, unless it is grounded in the second-person standpoint. Second-personal practical reasoning involves justification to by its very nature.

In Part IV, we turn to the constructive arguments with which such a foundation must be built. What I hope to have established by this point, and in these last two chapters in particular, is that the second-personal concepts these arguments will employ have a firm footing in human psychology as well as in powerful moral ideas and arguments. In what remains, I attempt to show that second-personal authority is not just an essential element of deeply held moral ideas and feelings. It is also something we presuppose whenever we take up a second-person perspective to address claims or demands of any kind at all. And, the second-person standpoint is a central element of practical reason *überhaupt.*

[^1]: As we will see, Hume has a minimalist view of what is necessary for the intentions to be appropriately shared, more like that of Bratman (1993) than Gilbert (1990).
[^2]: Although not cast explicitly in terms of reactive attitudes, I believe that Sripada (2005) can also be seen within this tradition.
[^3]: I was initially set thinking about these topics by Luca Parisoli's, "Hume and Reid on Promises" (2001), which I commented on at the David Hume Society Meetings, University College, Cork, Ireland, July 1999.
[^4]: Reid's *Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind* was published in 1788, twelve years after Adam Smith's discussion of the human disposition to "truck, barter, and exchange" in *Wealth of Nations* (1776), and eight years before J. G. Fichte's *Foundations of Natural Right* (1796), which established recognition *(Anerkennung)* as a central philosophical category of post-Kantian German philosophy.

[^5]: Hume lays them out in book 3, part 2 of *A Treatise of Human Nature* (Hume 1978) and section 3 of *An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals* (Hume 1985). Discussions include: Baier 1991; Cohon 1997; Darwall 1995a; Gauthier 1979, 1992; and Haakonssen 1981.
[^6]: The central idea here can be put by saying that Hume is operating with a "practice conception" rather than a "summary conception" of rules, in Rawls's sense (Rawls 1955). Justice is realized in rule-structured practices whose participants regard the rules as "sacred and inviolable" (Hume 1978: 533) rather than heuristics or "rules of thumb" for producing social good.

[^7]: Actually, context suggests that Hume does not really mean here that acts required by rules of justice can be harmful on balance when we take full account of their effects on the general practice. And his view in the *Treatise* may be that this never happens. However, he clearly has this possibility in mind in the famous "sensible knave" passage from the second *Enquiry* (1985b: 282–283). For our purposes, we can ignore these complications. I discuss them in Darwall 1995a: 284–318.
[^8]: For a different reading, see Postema 1995. Postema's "first-person plural" interpretation puts great weight on a distinction between the "common sense of interest" and "sense of common interest" that Hume himself does not consistently mark. Moreover, sympathy, which Postema is right to stress for its role in the first-person plural standpoint, evidently plays no role in Hume's explanation of the formation of the convention that establishes rules of justice. On the contrary, Hume quite clearly says that the original motive to establishing justice is self-interest.

[^9]: As against Gilbert, however, I argue that this reason is not simply overridable; it is defeasible—so defeasible, in fact, that it may never have any force at all if, for example, the agreement is coerced.
[^10]: Gilbert's point, of course, is that Hume's oarsmen are not really rowing the boat together. If one stops, and the other says, "Hey, I thought we were rowing together," the first could quite reasonably reply, "What do you mean, 'we'?"
[^11]: This passage suggests, as I mentioned in footnote 7, that in the *Treatise,* Hume believes that breaches of the rule actually are against violators' interests. The problem he is pointing to here, however, is that, even if it were more for violators' long-term interest to comply, they can't be relied upon to perceive this. Again, we need not worry about this complication.

[^12]: Any inclination to think that Hume is talking about a species of merit here that is different from that involved in justice should be dispelled by the fact that he makes this claim at the beginning of Part III ("Of Justice and Injustice") as part of an argument that justice is an artificial virtue.
[^13]: Thus, the virtuous have "the frequent satisfaction of seeing knaves, with all their pretended cunning and abilities, betrayed by their own maxims; and while they purpose to cheat with moderation and secrecy, a tempting incident occurs, nature is frail, and they give into the snare; whence they can never extricate themselves, without a total loss of reputation, and the forfeiture of all future trust and confidence with mankind" (Hume 1985b: 283).
[^14]: For more extensive discussion see Darwall 1994, 1999b, and 2004a.

[^15]: "I would have any one give me a reason why virtue and vice may not be involuntary, as well as beauty and deformity. These moral distinctions arise from the natural distinctions of pain and pleasure; and when we receive those feelings from the general consideration of any quality or character, we denominate it vicious or virtuous" (Hume 1978: 608–609). See also appendix 4, "Of Some Verbal Disputes," to Hume 1985b, where Hume argues that the distinction between moral vice and virtue, on the one hand, and other merely natural abilities and disabilities (such as wit and dullness), on the other, is merely verbal.
[^16]: On this point, see Watson 1996. Watson distinguishes between something's being ethically attributable to a person (for the purposes of what he calls eudaimonistic evaluation) and the person's being morally *accountable* for it in the sense of being liable to blame or moral sanction. Watson argues that accountability requires a form of control but attributability does not.

[^17]: Thus, Hume says that individuals "lay themselves under the restraint of such rules" (1978: 499) and that rules of justice are "immediately embraced" (1985b: 192). See Darwall 1995a: 284–318.
[^18]: Another possibility is that the trait of justice is not so much tied to a distinctive motive or reason of justice as to the useful habit of following the rules of justice. This fits better with Hume's text in various ways, but seems not to give us a distinctive motive of which to approve. I am indebted to Remy Debes for this suggestion.
[^19]: A similar "externalization" is involved in Mill's remark, quoted above, that the feeling of conscience is a motive to act rightly. As Mill himself notes, when we accept "customary morality" as a matter of conscience, a morally required action "presents itself to the mind with the feeling of being in itself obligatory" (1998: ch. 3, §1).

[^20]: Of course, it might motivate me to look for reasons of the right kind.
[^21]: Obviously, what Reid means by 'injury' is nothing physical or medical, but something that is appropriately resented, as in "Sir, you do me an injury."

[^22]: It is instructive to compare a passage from Hume's second *Enquiry:* "Were there a species of creatures, intermingled with men, which, though rational, were possessed of such inferior strength, both of body and mind, that they were incapable of all resistance, and could never, upon the highest provocation, make us feel the effects of their resentment; the necessary consequence, I think, is, that we should be bound, by the laws of humanity, to give gentle usage to these creatures, but should not, properly speaking, lie under any restraint of justice with regard to them, nor could they possess any right or property, exclusive of such arbitrary lords. Our intercourse with them could not be called society, which supposes a degree of equality; but absolute command on the one side, and servile obedience on the other. Whatever we covet, they must instantly resign: Our permission is the only tenure, by which they hold their possessions: Our compassion and kindness the only check, by which they curb our lawless will: And as no inconvenience ever results from the exercise of a power, so firmly established in nature, the restraints of justice and property, being totally *useless,* would never have place in so unequal a confederacy" (1985: 190). For justice to be in play, according to Hume, the parties must be sufficiently close in power to make abiding by its rules genuinely advantageous. This would not be so, he thinks, if our power were sufficiently great in relation to certain creatures that we could use them for our ends with impunity.<br>Hume's reference to resentment is notable, as Kate Abramson has pointed out to me. But it is important also that Hume takes its relevance not to be intrinsic (or even as evidence of injustice), but to be indirect via mutual advantage. Issues of justice arise *only-if* creatures can make us "feel the effects of their resentment" in a way that makes it in our interest to establish conventions that establish obligations toward them.<br>Hume is here subject to the same kind of Strawsonian criticism that I have frequently mentioned and specifically lodged against Bernard Williams in Chapter 5 (footnote 4). Like Williams, Hume wants to accommodate the category of justice (or rights, for Williams), but without the second-personal moral psychology necessary for us to be able to accept "reasons of the right kind" for challenging injustice. It is one thing, again, to think that it would be desirable, whether from anyone's individual point of view or from some common standpoint, to hold someone accountable for doing something, or even to think that a habit of doing so is desirable or even worthy or esteem, but quite another to think that the action is of a kind that warrants resentment along with the authority to demand forbearance. Like Williams, Hume only admits reasons for challenging injustice that are outside any we accept within the second-person standpoint when we hold another accountable. I am indebted here to discussion with Simon Blackburn.

[^23]: Note also the following passage from Reid: "He perceives that injury is done to himself, and that he has a right to redress. The natural principle of resentment is roused by the view of its proper object, and excites him to defend his right. Even the injurious person is conscious of his doing injury; he dreads a just retaliation; and if it be in the power of the injured person, he expects it as due and deserved" (1969: 416–417).
[^24]: Or, as Hume might have put it, "Romish," since he says that promising is "one of the most mysterious and incomprehensible operations that can possibly be imagin'd, and may even be compar'd to *transubstantiation,* or *holy orders,* where a certain form of words, along with a certain intention, changes entirely the nature of an external object, and even of a human creature" (Hume 1978: 524).

[^25]: As Searle famously argued in "How to Derive an 'Ought' from an 'Is' " (1964), giving rise to an obligation to the promisee is part of the very idea of a promise. As we noted in Chapter 3, however, we can't really get an 'ought' from an 'is', Searle to the contrary notwithstanding. Either a genuine obligation follows from a promise, in which case whether someone actually promised is itself a normative rather than a factual question, or if it is a factual question, then the only thing that follows is a *de facto* authority to demand that it be kept, not the authority *de jure* that a genuinely normative obligation involves.
[^26]: I have been much helped by discussion with Edward S. Hinchman, and by Hinchman 2000.
[^27]: As we saw in Chapter 3, however, these reasons are defeasible third-personally.
[^28]: Compare Nietzsche's remark at the beginning of essay two of *On the Genealogy of Morals* (1994): "To breed an animal with the *right to make promises*—is not this the paradoxical task that nature has set itself in the case of man?"

[^29]: According to the *Oxford English Dictionary,* a scourge was a whip or a lash used to spin a top. Ulpian was a third-century Roman jurist, and Titius evidently appears in an example of restoring property in Blackstone's *Commentaries.*
[^30]: For interesting differences between agreements in this "everyday" sense, and mutually exchanged promises, see Gilbert 1996a.
[^31]: Of course, this might still not be effective. My point is simply that if the parties took one another to have second-personal competence and authority, it would be possible for the conventions to become thus established. Unlike Hume's story, the parties could regard one another as having (and regarding themselves as having) reasons (of the right kind) to comply.

[^32]: This is a consequence of the instance of Strawson's Point we called "Cudworth's Point" (see Chapter 5 above). Just as God cannot obligate us by his commands without it already being the case that he has second-personal authority with respect to us, so also would it be impossible for two individuals to obligate themselves especially to one another by an agreement unless they already had the second-personal standing so to obligate one another in this way. Again: "Second-personal authority out, second-personal authority in."
[^33]: I take this helpful term from Scanlon 1998: 268.
[^34]: Note, however, that it seems to be possible for individuals to share intentions, if not to agree in the everyday sense, without the full satisfaction of Gilbert's conditions. On this see, Bratman 1992 and 1993.

[^35]: Gilbert (1996b) maintains that parties to an agreement are obligated to comply even if the agreement is coerced. She grants that there may be no moral obligation to keep coerced agreements, but holds that there is an obligation that creates a normative reason for acting nonetheless. But if, as I believe, the parties to an agreement presuppose that they have an equal dignity as free and equal persons in addressing one another second-personally at all, then it is hard to see how this can be so. Any second-personal reasons for acting that agreements normally give rise to would seem to be defeated if the agreement is coerced. Of course, there might be other reasons for keeping a coerced agreement, such as self-interest. But without a second-personal reason, there can be no obligation to keep the agreement.
[^36]: Along similar lines, one might say that a warranted demand for honest dealing is built into the very idea of relating accountably to others.

[^37]: In what follows, I draw on Darwall (2006).
[^38]: I refer to Scanlon's presentation (2003). A very similar account is provided in 1998: 295–317.
[^39]: See, for example, Hare 1967.

[^40]: Judith Thomson argues that the capacity of promises to obligate requires no special explanation: "There is nothing deeper that needs to be or can be said about how wordgivings generally and promisings in particular generate claims. Their moral force lies in their generating claims; and the fact that they do generate claims is explained by the fact that issuing an invitation is offering to bind oneself, so that when the invitation is accepted, the offer is accepted, and one therefore *is* bound" (1990: 303). But this explanation seems already to assume the (second-personal) authority to bind and be bound by accepted invitations; without that, even if we assume that an offer to bind oneself to another is an invitation and that if other accepts this invitation, she will have accepted one's being bound to her, it is unclear why one couldn't simply cancel that by taking it back (as one could not if there were a genuine obligation, as there would be if one and she had the relevant second-personal authorities to be bound and to bind in the first place). I am indebted to Gary Watson for this passage from Thomson. (See Watson unpublished.)
