# Preface

I have, I imagine, been thinking about the topic of this book for a long time without realizing it. Since the age of three, I have had an eye condition (called a "strabismus") that makes it impossible for me to direct both of my eyes to the same object at the same time. This hasn't affected my vision much. The most noticeable effect has been one that Hume refers to in the *Treatise* in considering the curious metaethical position that causing false belief is the source of moral wrong.[^1] If this were true, Hume says, then "those who are squint-sighted" would be immoral, since we often "imagine they salute or are talking to one person, while they address themselves to another" (Hume 1978: 462n). That's been my problem: I've had difficulty getting people to recognize that I'm trying to recognize them.[^2] And I suppose that that has led me to wonder what exactly is involved in reciprocal recognition, to think about its pervasiveness in human experience, and, more recently and self-consciously, to think through its significance for moral theory.[^3]

It is a familiar fact that something we take for granted actually involves a complex sensibility we don't fully appreciate. Most people don't realize, for example, that they accept elaborate norms of conversation (governing conversational distance, for instance) until they reflect on cases where these are egregiously violated. The same is true with a whole host of phenomena involving "the second-person standpoint." We have an implicit commitment to norms of respect and "second-personal authority" (the authority to address claims, demands, and expectations) that it can take reflection on cases where these are transgressed to appreciate.

More to the point here, I have come to believe that the second-person standpoint has a fundamental importance for moral theory and that it is impossible fully to understand many central moral ideas without it. In this book, I argue that moral obligation and responsibility (accountability), respect for and the dignity of persons, and the distinctive freedom of moral agents are all irreducibly second-personal. And I attempt to present, moreover, an argument that can vindicate the authority of moral obligation and these other ideas, again, from the second-person perspective.

Here I must beg the reader's patience. Although I hope the phenomena I will be pointing to in this book are familiar enough, I will be analyzing them in unfamiliar ways with abstract terms like "second-personal reason" and "second-personal competence." And many of my claims will be ambitious; some, no doubt, will be overly so. You may find your patience wearing thin. If so, there may, however, be a remedy. If your reaction takes the form of irritation or annoyance, it may flower into a Strawsonian reactive attitude of some kind, maybe something approaching resentment at my hubris or the waste of your time. If this happens, try stepping back and examining this thought or feeling; you may find the ideas of second-personal reason and authority lurking within. Of course, if your reaction is boredom or simply lack of interest, this remedy won't work.

In thinking through the ideas I develop in this book, I have incurred many debts to many people, almost too many to try decently to name even all whose help I distinctly remember. I have gotten enormously helpful reactions when presenting versions of these ideas in various forums and venues over the last several years. I am extremely grateful to numerous philosophy departments, societies, and individuals who invited me to present them. It was especially valuable to be able to work through early drafts of the manuscript in two graduate seminars, one at Ohio University in 2003 and the other at the University of Michigan in 2005. And I have benefited from innumerable interactions of other kinds. In addition to many other people, I am indebted to Kate Abramson, Donald Ainslie, Elizabeth Anderson, Brian Apicella, Nomy Arpaly, Carla Bagnoli, Marcia Baron, Jack Bender, Alyssa Bernstein, Lorraine Besser-Jones, Simon Blackburn, Michael Bratman, Aaron Bronfman, John Broome, Vivienne Brown, Allen Buchanan, Sarah Buss, Vanessa Carbonell, Jules Coleman, David Copp, Randall Curren, Jonathan Dancy, Justin D'Arms, Julian Darwall, Will Darwall, Steven Daskal, Remy Debes, Richard Dees, John Deigh, Robin Dillon, Chris Dodsworth, Jamie Dreier, Andrew Eshelman, Nir Eyal, William Fitzpatrick, Samuel Fleischacker, Robert Frank, Harry Frankfurt, Robyn Gaier, David Garvin, Gerald Gaus, Allan Gibbard, Peter Graham, Robert Gressis, Charles Griswold, Michael Hardimon, Christie Hartley, Sally Haslanger, Daniel Hausman, Susan Hawthorne, Barbara Herman, Pamela Hieronymi, Thomas E. Hill Jr., Ted Hinchman, Paul Hoffman, Tom Hurka, Paul Hurley, Nadeem Hussain, P. J. Ivanhoe, Daniel Jacobson, Agnieszka Jaworska, Marie Jayasekera, Robert Johnson, Rachana Kamtekar, Rob Kar, Daniel Keen, Christine Korsgaard, Michelle Kosch, Richard Kraut, John Ku, Arthur Kuflik, Rahul Kumar, Joel Kupperman, Rae Langton, Mark LeBar, David Levy, Ira Lindsay, Erica Lucast, Eric Mack, Tito Magri, Douglas MacLean, Michelle Mason, Joe Mendola, Martha Nussbaum, Howard Nye, Derek Parfit, James Petrik, Philip Pettit, Sara Postasi, Jerry Postema, Luke Potter, Ryan Preston, Wlodek Rabinowicz, Peter Railton, Joseph Raz, Andrews Reath, Connie Rosati, Jacob Ross, Emma Rothschild, Geoff Sayre-McCord, T. M. Scanlon, Brian Schaefer, Tamar Schapiro, Eric Schliesser, Franklin Scott, Mark Schroeder, Nishi Shah, Nancy Sherman, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, Anthony Skelton, Matthew Smith, Michael Smith, Jim Staihar, Jason Stanley, Michael Stocker, Sigrun Svavarsdottir, Julie Tannenbaum, Valerie Tiberius, Kevin Toh, Mark van Roojen, David Velleman, Peter Vranas, Kendall Walton, Gary Watson, Eric Weber, Marshall Weinberg, Andrea Westlund, Susan Wolf, David Wong, Allen Wood, Gabriel Zamosc-Regueros, Kate Zawidzki, Lei Zhong, and Arthur Zucker.

I have also received substantial institutional support without which this book would have been impossible. A National Endowment for the Humanities Fellowship in 1998–99 supported work on a different project, but one that got me thinking about the ideas I develop here. The James B. and Grace J. Nelson Endowment in the Department of Philosophy at The University of Michigan enabled me to take a year of research leave in 2002–3, during which I wrote the first draft of the book. And I am completing the manuscript now with sabbatical support from The University of Michigan.

Some parts of the book draw on previously published material. Part of Chapter 5 is based on "Autonomy in Modern Natural Law," in *New Essays on the History of Autonomy,* ed. Larry Krasnoff and Natalie Brender (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003) and appears with the permission of Cambridge University Press. Chapter 6 draws from "Respect and the Second-Person Standpoint," *Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association* 78 (2004): 43–60; it appears with the permission of the American Philosophical Association. And some material from Chapter 10 builds on "Fichte and the Second-Person Standpoint," *International Yearbook for German Idealism* 3 (2005): 91–113; it appears with the permission of Walter de Gruyter, Inc.

I am thankful also for the help that I have gotten from Harvard University Press and its staff and readers. Lindsay Waters has been a source of encouragement and wisdom. And the two readers for the Press provided many very useful suggestions.

As always, I am most grateful to my colleagues, students and faculty in the Department of Philosophy at The University of Michigan, especially Elizabeth Anderson, Allan Gibbard, Peter Railton, and, during the time I wrote this book, David Velleman, all of whom make Ann Arbor an ideal place to do moral philosophy.

Finally, I dedicate this book to my sons, Julian and Will Darwall. Nothing has supported me more in writing it than the encouragement and appreciation they have shown when we have talked about its ideas. I am in their debt in this and in many other ways.

[^1]: Hume mistakenly attributes this position to William Wollaston.
[^2]: But maybe I'm not the only one. See note 41 of Chapter 6.
[^3]: That's not the only thing that led me to focus on these issues. Having a mother who was afflicted with schizophrenia and whose last years with the family before institutionalization (in the 1950s) were spent in a prison of silence was certainly another. And other factors have played significant roles also.
