# Preface

I have, I imagine, been thinking about the topic of this book for a long time without [realizing](dictionary.md#realize) it. Since the age of three, I have had an eye [condition](dictionary.md#condition) (called a "strabismus") that makes it impossible for me to direct both of my eyes to the same [object](dictionary.md#object) at the same time. This hasn't affected my vision much. The most noticeable effect has been one that Hume refers to in the *Treatise* in [considering](dictionary.md#consider) the curious metaethical [position](dictionary.md#position) that causing [false](dictionary.md#false) [belief](dictionary.md#belief) is the [source](dictionary.md#source) of [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [wrong](dictionary.md#wrong).[^1] If this were [true](dictionary.md#true), Hume says, then "those who are squint-sighted" would be immoral, since we often "imagine they salute or are talking to one [person](dictionary.md#person), while they [address](dictionary.md#address) themselves to another" (Hume 1978: 462n). That's been my problem: I've had difficulty getting [people](dictionary.md#people) to [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) that I'm trying to [recognize](dictionary.md#recognize) them.[^2] And I suppose that that has led me to wonder what exactly is involved in reciprocal [recognition](dictionary.md#recognition), to think about its pervasiveness in [human](dictionary.md#human) experience, and, more recently and self-consciously, to think through its significance for [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [theory](dictionary.md#theory).[^3]

It is a familiar [fact](dictionary.md#fact) that something we take for granted actually involves a complex sensibility we don't fully appreciate. Most [people](dictionary.md#people) don't [realize](dictionary.md#realize), for example, that they [accept](dictionary.md#accept) elaborate [norms](dictionary.md#norm) of conversation (governing conversational distance, for instance) until they reflect on cases where these are egregiously [violated](dictionary.md#violate). The same is [true](dictionary.md#true) with a whole host of [phenomena](dictionary.md#phenomena) involving "the [second-person](dictionary.md#second-person) standpoint." We have an [implicit](dictionary.md#implicit) [commitment](dictionary.md#commitment) to [norms](dictionary.md#norm) of [respect](dictionary.md#respect) and "[second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [authority](dictionary.md#authority)" (the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) to [address](dictionary.md#address) [claims](dictionary.md#claim), [demands](dictionary.md#demand), and expectations) that it can take [reflection](dictionary.md#reflection) on cases where these are transgressed to appreciate.

More to the point here, I have come to [believe](dictionary.md#believe) that the [second-person](dictionary.md#second-person) standpoint has a [fundamental](dictionary.md#fundamental) importance for [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [theory](dictionary.md#theory) and that it is impossible fully to [understand](dictionary.md#understand) many central [moral](dictionary.md#moral) ideas without it. In this book, I [argue](dictionary.md#argue) that [moral obligation](dictionary.md#moral%20obligation) and [responsibility](dictionary.md#responsibility) ([accountability](dictionary.md#accountability)), [respect](dictionary.md#respect) for and the [dignity](dictionary.md#dignity) of [persons](dictionary.md#person), and the [distinctive](dictionary.md#distinctive) [freedom](dictionary.md#freedom) of [moral](dictionary.md#moral) [agents](dictionary.md#agent) are all irreducibly [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal). And I attempt to present, moreover, an [argument](dictionary.md#argument) that can vindicate the [authority](dictionary.md#authority) of [moral obligation](dictionary.md#moral%20obligation) and these other ideas, again, from the [second-person](dictionary.md#second-person) perspective.

Here I must beg the reader's patience. Although I hope the [phenomena](dictionary.md#phenomena) I [will](dictionary.md#will) be pointing to in this book are familiar enough, I [will](dictionary.md#will) be [analyzing](dictionary.md#analyze) them in unfamiliar ways with abstract terms like "[second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [reason](dictionary.md#reason)" and "[second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) competence." And many of my [claims](dictionary.md#claim) [will](dictionary.md#will) be ambitious; some, no doubt, [will](dictionary.md#will) be overly so. You may find your patience wearing [thin](dictionary.md#thin). If so, there may, however, be a remedy. If your reaction takes the [form](dictionary.md#form) of irritation or annoyance, it may flower into a Strawsonian [reactive](dictionary.md#reactive) [attitude](dictionary.md#attitude) of some [kind](dictionary.md#kind), maybe something approaching [resentment](dictionary.md#resentment) at my hubris or the waste of your time. If this happens, try stepping back and examining this thought or [feeling](dictionary.md#feeling); you may find the ideas of [second-personal](dictionary.md#second-personal) [reason](dictionary.md#reason) and [authority](dictionary.md#authority) lurking within. Of course, if your reaction is boredom or simply lack of [interest](dictionary.md#interest), this remedy won't work.

In thinking through the ideas I develop in this book, I have incurred many debts to many [people](dictionary.md#people), almost too many to try decently to [name](dictionary.md#name) even all whose help I distinctly remember. I have gotten enormously helpful reactions when presenting versions of these ideas in various forums and venues over the last several years. I am extremely grateful to numerous philosophy departments, societies, and [individuals](dictionary.md#individual) who invited me to present them. It was especially valuable to be able to work through early drafts of the manuscript in two graduate seminars, one at Ohio University in 2003 and the other at the University of Michigan in 2005. And I have [benefited](dictionary.md#benefit) from innumerable interactions of other [kinds](dictionary.md#kind). In addition to many other [people](dictionary.md#people), I am indebted to Kate Abramson, Donald Ainslie, Elizabeth Anderson, Brian Apicella, Nomy Arpaly, Carla Bagnoli, Marcia Baron, Jack Bender, Alyssa Bernstein, Lorraine Besser-Jones, Simon Blackburn, Michael Bratman, Aaron Bronfman, John Broome, Vivienne Brown, Allen Buchanan, Sarah Buss, Vanessa Carbonell, Jules Coleman, David Copp, Randall Curren, Jonathan Dancy, Justin D'Arms, Julian Darwall, [Will](dictionary.md#will) Darwall, Steven Daskal, Remy Debes, Richard Dees, John Deigh, Robin Dillon, Chris Dodsworth, Jamie Dreier, Andrew Eshelman, Nir Eyal, William Fitzpatrick, Samuel Fleischacker, Robert Frank, Harry Frankfurt, Robyn Gaier, David Garvin, Gerald Gaus, Allan Gibbard, Peter Graham, Robert Gressis, Charles Griswold, Michael Hardimon, Christie Hartley, Sally Haslanger, Daniel Hausman, Susan Hawthorne, Barbara Herman, Pamela Hieronymi, Thomas E. Hill Jr., Ted Hinchman, Paul Hoffman, Tom Hurka, Paul Hurley, Nadeem Hussain, P. J. Ivanhoe, Daniel Jacobson, Agnieszka Jaworska, Marie Jayasekera, Robert Johnson, Rachana Kamtekar, Rob Kar, Daniel Keen, Christine Korsgaard, Michelle Kosch, Richard Kraut, John Ku, Arthur Kuflik, Rahul Kumar, Joel Kupperman, Rae Langton, Mark LeBar, David Levy, Ira Lindsay, Erica Lucast, Eric Mack, Tito Magri, Douglas MacLean, Michelle Mason, Joe Mendola, Martha Nussbaum, Howard Nye, Derek Parfit, James Petrik, Philip Pettit, Sara Postasi, Jerry Postema, Luke Potter, Ryan Preston, Wlodek Rabinowicz, Peter Railton, Joseph Raz, Andrews Reath, Connie Rosati, Jacob Ross, Emma Rothschild, Geoff Sayre-McCord, T. M. Scanlon, Brian Schaefer, Tamar Schapiro, Eric Schliesser, Franklin Scott, Mark Schroeder, Nishi Shah, Nancy Sherman, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, Anthony Skelton, Matthew Smith, Michael Smith, Jim Staihar, Jason Stanley, Michael Stocker, Sigrun Svavarsdottir, Julie Tannenbaum, Valerie Tiberius, Kevin Toh, Mark van Roojen, David Velleman, Peter Vranas, Kendall Walton, Gary Watson, Eric Weber, Marshall Weinberg, Andrea Westlund, Susan Wolf, David Wong, Allen Wood, Gabriel Zamosc-Regueros, Kate Zawidzki, Lei Zhong, and Arthur Zucker.

I have also received substantial [institutional](dictionary.md#institutional) support without which this book would have been impossible. A National Endowment for the [Humanities](dictionary.md#humanity) Fellowship in 1998–99 supported work on a [different](dictionary.md#different) project, but one that got me thinking about the ideas I develop here. The James B. and Grace J. Nelson Endowment in the Department of Philosophy at The University of Michigan enabled me to take a year of research leave in 2002–3, during which I wrote the first draft of the book. And I am [completing](dictionary.md#complete) the manuscript now with sabbatical support from The University of Michigan.

Some parts of the book draw on previously published material. Part of Chapter 5 is based on "[Autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy) in [Modern](dictionary.md#modern) [Natural Law](dictionary.md#natural%20law)," in *New Essays on the History of [Autonomy](dictionary.md#autonomy),* ed. Larry Krasnoff and Natalie Brender (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003) and appears with the [permission](dictionary.md#permission) of Cambridge University Press. Chapter 6 draws from "[Respect](dictionary.md#respect) and the [Second-Person](dictionary.md#second-person) Standpoint," *Proceedings and [Addresses](dictionary.md#address) of the American Philosophical Association* 78 (2004): 43–60; it appears with the [permission](dictionary.md#permission) of the American Philosophical Association. And some material from Chapter 10 builds on "Fichte and the [Second-Person](dictionary.md#second-person) Standpoint," *International Yearbook for German [Idealism](dictionary.md#idealism)* 3 (2005): 91–113; it appears with the [permission](dictionary.md#permission) of Walter de Gruyter, Inc.

I am thankful also for the help that I have gotten from Harvard University Press and its staff and readers. Lindsay Waters has been a [source](dictionary.md#source) of encouragement and [wisdom](dictionary.md#wisdom). And the two readers for the Press provided many very useful [suggestions](dictionary.md#suggestion).

As always, I am most grateful to my colleagues, students and faculty in the Department of Philosophy at The University of Michigan, especially Elizabeth Anderson, Allan Gibbard, Peter Railton, and, during the time I wrote this book, David Velleman, all of whom make Ann Arbor an [ideal](dictionary.md#ideal) place to do [moral](dictionary.md#moral) philosophy.

Finally, I dedicate this book to my sons, Julian and [Will](dictionary.md#will) Darwall. Nothing has supported me more in writing it than the encouragement and [appreciation](dictionary.md#appreciation) they have shown when we have talked about its ideas. I am in their debt in this and in many other ways.

[^1]: Hume mistakenly [attributes](dictionary.md#attribute) this [position](dictionary.md#position) to William Wollaston.
[^2]: But maybe I'm not the only one. See note 41 of Chapter 6.
[^3]: That's not the only thing that led me to focus on these [issues](dictionary.md#issue). Having a mother who was afflicted with schizophrenia and whose last years with the family before institutionalization (in the 1950s) were spent in a prison of silence was certainly another. And other factors have played significant [roles](dictionary.md#role) also.
