# Introduction

The meaning of "dignity" today would surprise our modern ancestors. For us, dignity—that is, human dignity—refers to the fundamental moral worth or status supposedly belonging to all persons equally. It is correspondingly a precious concept, especially in western society. It marks a line in the moral sand that most of us think should never be crossed. Oppressed and marginalized people cry out on behalf of dignity. Humanitarian organizations lobby in its name. And state constitutions around the word claim dignity as the explicit grounds of their most fundamental entitlements and protections.

But all this is relatively new. Until about 1830–1850, neither the English term "dignity," nor its Latin root *dignitas*, nor the French counterpart *dignité*, had any currency as meaning the "inherent or unearned worth of all persons." Instead, in everything from Hobbes's *Leviathan* (1651) to Samuel Johnson's *Dictionary* (1755) to Webster's *Compendious Dictionary* (1806), "dignity" had a conventional merit connotation, something like the "rank of elevation" that Johnson officially gave it.[^1] In other words, until a little over a century ago, dignity connoted *social* status of the kind associated with nobility, power, gentlemanly comportment, or preferment within the church—not some fundamental, unearned, equally shared *moral* status among humans.

The poignancy of this change is reflected in the progress of human rights during the same time period. Consider: In the modern world, circa 1750 to the present, few if any moral or political claims have garnered more agreement than the claim that humans enjoy certain "unalienable" rights, as the US Declaration of Independence famously described them in 1776. And if we pause to ask, "In virtue of what do we have such rights?"—the answer most of us reach is that these rights derive from the fundamental moral worth of humans, which, moreover, is an answer that *today* we all recognize as synonymous with a claim about human dignity. And yet the US Declaration nowhere explicitly uses the term "dignity" to support its famed rights claim.[^2] Nor does the US Constitution. In fact, unlike rights terminology, which became common in constitutional contexts during the 1700s, and in western use stretches at least as far back as England's Magna Carta in 1215, dignity terminology does not appear in such a context until the Mexican constitution of 1917, and shortly thereafter the 1919 Weimer constitution. And even then, it isn't clear that these documents understand dignity in the moralized sense, or use it to ground rights.[^3] "Dignity" *might* have this moralized connotation in the preamble to the Constitution of Ireland of 1937, which declares, among many reasons for adopting it, "so that the dignity and freedom of the individual may be assured."[^4] But ultimately it wasn't until the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which uses the term twice in the preamble to justify itself, that "dignity" began to feature clearly and commonly in official political declarations with the kind of moralized meaning we ascribe to it today (after which point the use of "dignity" in such contexts expanded dramatically).[^5]

So how did this sea change between the merit and moral meanings of "dignity" come about? The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a clear reflection of the fact that dignity's moralized meaning had become normalized by 1948. But what happened before 1948 that explains this? And even if we can answer this question, and thereby clarify dignity's nineteenth- and early twentieth-century history, we must wonder—is the moralized meaning of dignity, which is so fundamental to our lives today, really only two centuries old? Or might the moralized concept of equal, fundamental human worth be older, albeit existing under different terminology? If so, just how old is the moralized concept of dignity? On the other hand, who were the innovators of the modern conception? Many readers of this volume will immediately think of Immanuel Kant, the German Enlightenment philosopher who, in 1785, famously claimed we have a categorical duty to treat persons only as "ends in themselves" and never as "mere means."[^6] This is because, Kant argued, humans do not have a "price," only *Würde* often translated as "dignity." But did Kant really construct his argument for dignity out of whole cloth? Or were there even earlier innovators of the modern concept? If so, how did these various early modern ideas about dignity connect up to the moralized notion we use today? And, finally, how do we reconcile the ever-growing ubiquity of dignity talk in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries with its equally manifest violation, as, for example, occurred in America during its slavery years and subsequent Jim Crow era; but also as seems reflected in the ongoing economic disparity between whites and blacks in America today, in America's practice of mass incarceration of black men, in its blind eye for black-on-black gun violence, and, most recently, in the so far judicially vindicated but wildly suspect police killings of black men?[^7]

This volume tries to answer these questions, and thereby to deliver the first dedicated conceptual history of dignity in its moralized sense. I start with a brief overview.

## A Basic Distinction

In order to make sense of the history of dignity, it helps to keep the following distinction in mind. When we speak of dignity, there are two different kinds, or levels, of claims we tend to make. First, we make *substantive* claims about what it takes to have dignity. That is, we hypothesize what it is about being human that makes it true that we have dignity. Perhaps it is our autonomy, or our rationality, or our soul, or our "likeness" to God, or our capacity to form caring relationships, or our bodily form, and so on. Each of these would be a way of answering the question: In virtue of what do humans *have* dignity?

Second, we make *formal* claims about dignity. That is, we identify the general conceptual features or conditions that we think apply to any suitable substantive claim. For example, regardless of what we think makes it true that we have dignity (such as rationality), we often speak of dignity as something humans don't have to earn. If we accept this, then this feature of being "unearned" would be formal. And it would constrain what we are willing to accept as far as substantive claims go. Thus, one might sensibly say, "I'm not sure what it is about being human that makes it true that we have dignity. Maybe it is our capacity for rationality. Maybe it is something else. But whatever it is, it better be something we don't have to earn. Or I won't call it dignity."

Now, any substantive claim (that is, any answer to the "in virtue of what" question) eventually requires defense; likewise for formal claims. And of course some of these claims will be more contentious than others. Furthermore, some claims will raise new questions. For example, if we claim that humans have dignity in virtue of our capacity to form caring relationships, then we must wonder whether dignity is enjoyed by nonhuman animals, whether primates, pigeons, pandas, or poodles. Finally, note that it is perfectly possible that distinct claims about the nature of dignity, substantive or formal, will be compatible. This is easy to see in the formal case. For example, dignity is often said to be not only an *unearned* value but also a *distinctive* value, in the sense that the worth of a human being is not straightforwardly comparable to other values, whether this other value is the (nonmoral) worth of a good apple or the (moral) worth of a good action. But compatibility is also possible for different answers to the substantive "in virtue of what" question. Thus, there is no pretheoretical reason to deny that we have dignity in virtue of, say, *both* our autonomy *and* our ability to form caring relationships. In other words, the substance of dignity might be plural.

Having said all this, also keep in mind that the chapters in this volume do not primarily aim to defend any given theory of dignity. By and in large, they aim to analyze past theories and their defenses. Correspondingly, most of the questions I just articulated—such as whether a given account of dignity extends to animals—are not much discussed here. Moreover, the reader should note that most of the authors in this volume do not stop to explicitly distinguish substantive claims about dignity from formal ones, as I just did. This substantive-formal distinction is my own ahistorical observation, which I offer as a tool for the reader, to help her digest the various chapters on their own terms, as well as synthesize conclusions about the volume as a whole.

## Dignity Now

In retrospect, there were signs in the eighteenth-century usage that predicted a revision from the merit sense of dignity to the moralized sense. For example, although Samuel Johnson defined *worthy* as "valuable; noble; illustrious; having dignity or excellence," Johnson's definition of the primitive term, *worth*, was dominated by fungible, extrinsic, and economic notions of value. Thus "dignity," as opposed to "worth," must have presented itself to Kant's first translators as an attractive choice for Kant's term *Würde* (at least, in the specific context of *human* worth, which Kant was trying to explain).[^8] After all, as I noted already, Kant claimed that to have dignity is to be "raised above all price"—so a term essentially connoting interchangeable value, as "worth" did at the time, would have been a poor choice.[^9]

Also interesting are elements internal to Johnson's *Dictionary* that suggest some drift in the concept of dignity, namely, toward a *non*fungible sense of worth. Thus, consider Johnson's first two definitions of *equality*:

> 1. Likeness to any qualities compared
> 2. The same degree of dignity[^10]

Given the range of egalitarian agitation across all elements of mideighteenth-century European culture, this is a remarkable definition. To suggest that true equality means *equal* human *dignity* is to challenge the then-dominant use of "dignity" to indicate *un*equal measures of social distinction, such as existed between gentry and commoners. This impression is buttressed by the usage example Johnson selected from Milton for the second definition noted above, of "the same degree of dignity":

> One shall rise, Of proud ambition; who, not content With fair *equality*, fraternal slate, Will arrogate dominion undeserv'd, Over his brethren.[^11]

Or consider another of Johnson's usage examples, this time from Shakespeare, for the first definition of "man" as "human being":

> The king is but a *man* as I am.[^12]

In a day where divine right and absolute sovereignty were live ideas, and dictionaries and encyclopedias had become clandestine means for the expression of irreverent ideas, we definitely miss something if we dismiss Johnson's usage choices as politically and philosophically unimportant. Instead, I suggest Johnson's choices mark a deeper story about a general rethinking of human worth during the European Enlightenment—a story that somehow explains, at least partly, how we got to the moralized sense of dignity common today.[^13]

None of this is to suggest, however, that we enjoy a unified concept of dignity today, as if there was a clean transition from the older merit connotation of social rank to a contemporary moralized one of unearned, equal worth of persons. Obviously this isn't true. We still speak of the dignity of queens and kings; we speak of dignitaries; and we speak of people acting in dignified ways. All these have social merit connotations. Moreover, there are connotations of "dignity" that don't fit easily with either the merit or the moralized meaning. The term sometimes connotes poise, gravitas, beauty, grace, personality, and integrity. We also talk of one's "sense" of dignity and call people out when we think such a sense lacking, as when we say to someone who lives under the boss's thumb, "Where is your sense of dignity?" In these cases we seem to mean something like (though not exactly like), psychological self-esteem.[^14]

This complexity is a problem for those interested in the moralized concept of dignity for two connected reasons. First, relative to other areas of philosophical inquiry, the study of dignity is very thin. There is, to be sure, a considerable body of literature on Kant's particular view of dignity. And dignity is often marshaled by name to justify various arguments in contemporary moral and political philosophy. But there hasn't been much study of dignity itself. There hasn't been much independent theory about what dignity *is*—let alone a serious, comprehensive history of the concept. Admittedly, this has started to change, and this change is welcome. However, given the weight the concept bears in western value systems today as the implicit or explicit grounds for egalitarianism and theories of human rights, as well as a principle of legal theory, judicial reasoning, and even written law—the paucity of research into dignity is odd.

Second, the conceptual complexity surrounding dignity has sparked disagreement about the utility of the concept just as research into it seems ready to blossom. In particular, some have argued that the complexity of "dignity" is either cumbersome messiness or essential ambiguity, either of which constitutes a sufficient reason to jettison the notion from practical discourse. The Yale bioethicist Ruth Macklin made this complaint in a widely read 2002 editorial: "Dignity," Macklin asserted, "is a useless concept. It means no more than respect for persons or their autonomy."[^15] Initially, Macklin was answered by blunt contradiction. For example, in their 2007 anthology, *Perspectives on Human Dignity* one of the first anthologies devoted to the topic of dignity—Jeff Malpas and Norelle Lickiss spoke *not* of ambiguity, but instead of the conceptual "breadth" of dignity. And they argued this breadth is evidence of the fundamental importance of the concept of dignity to our lives.[^16] However, in the ensuing years the kind of skepticism Macklin expressed has proven to have staying power. Correspondingly, scholars hoping to vindicate the utility of dignity have increasingly thought it necessary to unravel its knotted ball of meanings, not simply admire them. And yet this interest in unraveling the meanings of dignity has not generally corresponded with serious history of these meanings; hence my motivation for the volume of essays before you.

To be clear, there have been some good starts at history. Some of these have come as part of contemporary projects primarily aimed at delivering new constructive theories of human dignity. For example, feminist theory has occasionally connected up with historical reflection about dignity, especially in the work of Martha Nussbaum. Nussbaum has argued for a "capabilities" conception of human dignity, which she has partly drawn from ancient Stoic cosmopolitism.[^17] Or there is George Kateb's *Human Dignity* (2011), which suggests that human dignity is partly constituted by a unique role humans have—or should have—as "stewards" of the earth. Kateb's argument plays off some illuminating historical reflections on classical liberal conceptions of human worth.[^18] And then there is Jeremy Waldron's short but important 2012 essay, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights.* Waldron's argument necessarily involves some history in as much as he claims that our moralized concept of dignity is really still a merit concept, that is, *apiece with* its early modern meaning.[^19] The twist, according to Waldron, is that the political, social, and moral revolutions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries led to a uniform "leveling up" of social rank. Today, he claims, we all have the same elevated *social* rank.

More explicit history also exists. One doesn't have to dig hard, for example, to find historical research on dignity in legal and constitutional theory. But then again, the bulk of this research has dealt only with early to middle twentieth-century history.[^20] By contrast, the volume I am offering you explores much farther back. An important exception, in the legal context, is Christopher McCrudden's "Human Dignity and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights" (2008), the opening of which offers a wonderfully concise history of the idea of dignity in legal theory reaching back to the ancient world. Still, McCrudden's history is only meant to set up a larger nonhistorical inquiry. Correspondingly, he covers the entire pre-nineteenth-century legal history of dignity in just a few pages. The volume I am offering does not hurry.[^21]

Michael Rosen's *Dignity: Its History and Meaning* (2012) is another important entry into explicit history. Rosen's book is even predicated on Macklin's skeptical utility challenge to dignity, thus fitting nicely into the dialectic I've been sketching.[^22] And yet Rosen's book is also intentionally breezy in the sense that it self-consciously doesn't pretend at expertise on every era of history it covers, but rather attempts to offer a bird's-eye view on the concept of dignity in general. By contrast, this volume does aim at expertise in each of the historical periods it examines, and its focus is not dignity in general, but dignity in the moralized sense. Finally, there is the *Cambridge Handbook of Human Dignity* (2014)—a massive book with a sweeping overview of dignity and its historical development. As such, it is an important resource for serious scholars. But it is a very different book from the volume now before you. The volume before you is not a handbook. It does not pretend to be an encyclopedia of dignity's origins, historical meaning, and import. It is not an accounting of "all" that dignity once meant.

On the contrary, as I said before, this volume is constrained to being a history of dignity in its moralized sense. Moreover, what follows in this volume is not a series of descriptions recording dignity's history, as would be typical in a handbook. Instead, what follows is a series of arguments that aims to set that record straight—at least with respect to dignity's moralized sense. In each chapter, historical assumptions are challenged, platitudes overturned, and new historical possibilities staked out.

## Dignity Then?

In what ways does the history of dignity need straightening out? Frankly, in more ways than this volume can address. Indeed, even between the main chapters of this volume the reader will find shorter reflection pieces that extend its critical approach. Thus, David Wong briefly wonders whether dignity really had a place in ancient Chinese traditions, as some have suggested. Edward Town asks how the rise of a moralized dignity ethos in Europe was reflected in the art of its day. Charles Mills challenges us to consider the degree to which the dignity ethos is indexed to a particular historical time and, as a consequence, turns on hidden assumptions about "whiteness." Somogy Varga thinks about dignity and its relation to labor, challenging us to reconsider Marx's worry that the dignity ethos is just way of beguiling us into accepting the drudgery and alienating life of capitalist society. Marcus Duwell discusses dignity in the context of medicine, specifically to warn about overeager applications of dignity in bioethics. And Emma Kaufman confronts us with the stark injustices of the American penal system and its use of the death penalty, ultimately posing this unsettling question about the western sermon of human dignity: Could it be that dignity is a relationship between people and polities, one that disappears when governments incarcerate and kill?

Meanwhile, there are at least four major platitudes about dignity's history, which the main chapters of this volume end up proving false or at least highly exaggerated. Depending on your background, each of these may ring more or less true—that is, as being a platitude about the history of dignity. But I assure you that each has its quarter in contemporary discussion.

> 1. Platitude: The western creed of human dignity stems from the wisdom of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century revolutionary thinkers, who at the founding of new liberal states like America, or the reformation of existing ones like France and England, sagely propounded the inviolable value of individual human beings. In fact, as Mika LaVaque-Manty shows, the universalization of a moralized sense of dignity did not turn on a few moments of moral serendipity about the inherent worth of human persons, which was then writ large into formative constitutional documents. Instead, the process by which the moralized sense of dignity was universalized was a complex political process that relied on "making *contingent* and *noninherent* attributes of persons the grounds for why someone should be regarded as having dignity." Relatedly, in her contribution, Christine Henderson argues that this process was intimately connected to the "bourgeoisie" social class that began to emerge in later eighteenth century. As a result of the interplay of changing economic roles and the social virtues that became associated with those roles, Henderson argues, the "workingman" began to rethink himself and his social place in a way consistent with the moralized sense of dignity. Finally, Bernard Boxill reminds us that romantic idealizations of the universalization of human dignity in the modern world are belied by the social paradoxes faced by marginalized peoples during the same period. Boxill takes as his foil W. E. B. Du Bois's efforts to endorse emergent ideas of human equality in the face of the gross inequity facing black people in the western world. Through this foil Boxill further explores the lamentable burden of other early modern Africana philosophers: to reconcile the bourgeoning ethos of dignity with the lived experience of oppression.

> 2. Platitude: The early modern concept of dignity originates with Immanuel Kant, who argued that all persons have an inherent value, or dignity, stemming from their capacity for rationality, which value commands moral respect from others. In fact, this dogma—perhaps the greatest platitude of the bunch—is seriously suspect. In the first place, Oliver Sensen argues that it is a long-standing interpretive mistake to think Kant grounds the obligation to respect others on a value the *other* possesses, and, moreover, that "dignity" is not the name Kant gives to such a value anyway. Sensen also details Kant's indebtedness to Rousseau for his own thinking about human worth and respect. Stephen Darwall also examines the connection between dignity and respect, but now to show that only certain conceptions of dignity will support the kind of inference about respect that could justify using dignity to ground human rights. Moreover, Darwall argues, even if Kant was on the right track on this score, the ultimate credit goes to the natural law philosopher Samuel Pufendorf, who was writing a century before Kant. Finally, in my own contribution to the volume, I argue that Pufendorf 's lead was followed by another pre-Kantian thinker, the French *luminaire* Denis Diderot. More important, according to Diderot dignity did not consist (substantively) in our *rational* nature, but in our *passionate* nature. This suggests a radical historical alternative to the stale rationalist mantra about dignity in philosophical ethics.

> 3. Platitude: The moralized concept of dignity does not originate with Kant. It was explicitly celebrated as early as the Renaissance, in Giovanni Pico della Mirandola's *Oration on the Dignity of Man* from 1486. Moreover, Pico's oration is drawn from the older, medieval Christian doctrine of *imago Dei*—which tells us that we are made in God's likeness ("in the image of God"), and this likeness grounds our distinctive moral worth or status. In fact, though Christian theologians will be disappointed to hear it, once again these claims are at best misleading and at worst simply false. First, Brian Copenhaver flatly contradicts the claim that Pico was talking about dignity in the moralized sense. Besides reminding us that the title of Pico's speech postdates Pico, Cophenaver points out that the speech uses the Latin *dignitas* only twice, and that "in neither case does *dignitas* belong to humans, except aspirationally, and neither justifies 'dignity' as a translation, with all the Kantian baggage of the modern English word." On the contrary, if there was a Renaissance source for dignity, Copenhaver argues, it comes from Pico's predecessor, Giannozzo Manetti. Adding to this reversal of fortunes, Bonnie Kent marshals extensive evidence against the claim that *imago Dei* was conceived (at least in the tradition of the Latin West) in a way that could be reconciled with today's moralized concept of dignity. She acknowledges that dignity was widely discussed by medieval Christian scholars; likewise for the doctrine of *imago Dei*. However, Kent argues, the stark truth is that these discussions did not intersect in a way that supports an inference to our moralized notion of dignity. In fact, if there was a live medieval religious doctrine of dignity, it seems we would be better served looking to Arabic traditions. Thus, in his contribution, Mustafa Shah argues that a moralized concept of dignity *can* be attributed to Islamic scholarship during the same period—though it must be untangled from merit conceptions that also loomed large. In the Islamic tradition, Shah explains, legislation of law deals with ritual and non-ritual: "A perfect distinction is not drawn between the realm of the spiritual and the realm of the temporal: the field of law, or Sharīʿah, focuses on the systematic regulation of *all* aspects of human conduct and interaction." Hence, discussions of respect between persons and all that goes with it, from station and rank to integrity and inalienable worth, were *constitutive* topics in the religious scholarship of the day.

> 4. Platitude: "Dignity" derives from the Latin *dignitas*; and *dignitas*, which was a major subject of ancient Roman discussion, is the true origin of our concept of dignity. For, although some Roman thinkers thought of *dignitas* only in its merit sense, others, and most importantly, Cicero, had a proleptic understanding of *dignitas* that anticipated today's moralized sense. In fact, the textual support for this increasingly popular interpretation of Roman thought is very thin, as Miriam Griffin demonstrates in her contribution to this volume. On the one hand, she argues, straightforward lexical analysis offers very little support for connecting *dignitas* to our present-day, moralized sense of dignity. On the other hand, when we branch out to other ancient Roman concepts in an effort to see if dignity might be simply hiding under different terminology, we run into a fundamental challenge. "Stoics and Roman moralists," Griffin explains, "think in terms of *officia*, obligations or duties or functions that our nature, properly understood, imposes on *us*." Correspondingly, "The entitlements and rights of those at the *receiving end* of our actions are far less prominent in their thinking" (emphases added). So, Griffin warns, in looking for a Roman precursor to our modern notion of dignity, "we are swimming against the current." And yet once again there is a constructive irony. For, even if Roman thought was not as forward-thinking as some have claimed, Patrice Rankine suggests that a moralized notion of dignity does have a place in the even older Homeric epics and some of the poetic tradition that followed. To be clear, Rankine does not suggest that Homer and his heirs espoused anything like a *doctrine* of dignity. "Instead," he argues, in the ancient poetic tradition, "human dignity is a substantive given … In particular, it is literally *put into practice* throughout the literature from Homer to the playwrights."

Of course, the foregoing is superficial summary. The real action lies in what comes next—that is, in the actual chapters and reflections of this volume. Indeed, we have now arrived at the beginning. For it is in the ancient poems of Homer that this volume begins, moving step by step in the opposite direction to the one in which I've just led us, tracing the concept of dignity from Homer through Roman and medieval thought, into the Renaissance and Enlightenment, and finally to the socially tumultuous nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries. So let these prefatory remarks cease. I won't be blamed for further postponing the thrills.

[^1]: "Page View, Page 591," in *A Dictionary of the English Language: A Digital Edition of the 1755 Classic by Samuel Johnson*, ed. Brandi Besalke. Last modified December 6, 2012.
[^2]: See Stephen Darwall's contribution to this volume for further discussion of dignity in legal contexts.
[^3]: Somogy Varga thinks dignity is being used in a moralized sense in the Weimer constitution; see his contribution to this volume.
[^4]: For more on the connection to state constitutions see O. Schachter, "Human Dignity as a Normative Concept," *American Journal of International Law* 77 (1983): 848–54; T. Iglesias, "Bedrock Truths and the Dignity of the Individual," *Logos* 4 (2001): 114–34; or chapter 4 of M. Lebech, *On the Problem of Human Dignity: A Hermeneutical and Phenomenological Investigation* (Würzburg: Königshausen and Neumann, 2008).
[^5]: The justificatory order between rights and dignity was implied in the earlier UN Charter of 1945. But it was not made explicit until a 1966 convention amending that Charter ("United Nations Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights," adopted by GA Res. 2200A [XXI] of December 16, 1966). Ensuing political declarations include the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany (1949), the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference (1975), and the constitutions of India (1949), Portugal (1976), and South Africa (1993), just to name a few. See Mika La-Vaque Manty's contribution to this volume for further discussion of the UN declaration.

[^6]: Immanuel Kant, *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals* (1785), in *Practical Philosophy*, trans. and ed. Mary J. Gregor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 4:429. References are to page numbers of the Preussische Akademie edition.
[^7]: In 2015, American police killed unarmed black people at five times the rate of unarmed white men—102 in all. As of the writing of this introduction in July 2016, 136 black people have been killed by American officers already this year. Some of the most controversial cases are Philando Castille and Alton Sterling in 2016, Walter Scott and Freddie Gray in 2015, and Eric Garner, Tamir Rice, and Michael Brown (in 2014)—though tragically there are so many, many more names.
[^8]: The fungibility of value was also true of the German *Werth*, which translators would have been trying to distinguish from *Würde*.
[^9]: Kant, *Groundwork*, 4:434.
[^10]: "Page View, Page 714," in Johnson, *Dictionary*.
[^11]: "Page View, Page 714," in Johnson, *Dictionary*.
[^12]: "Page View, Page 1252," in Johnson, *Dictionary*.
[^13]: Boswell's famous biography of Johnson led to the impression that Johnson was deeply conservative. This view is no longer uncritically accepted. Indeed, Johnson opposed slavery on moral grounds, and, as Boswell himself related, once proposed a toast to the "next rebellion of the negroes in the West Indies."

[^14]: Strictly speaking, "dignity" can even denote the apex of planetary astrological influence.
[^15]: Ruth Macklin, "Dignity Is a Useless Concept," *British Medical Journal* 327 (2003): 1419–20. Actually the article is more notorious than famous because the claim was more dogmatic opinion than the product of any serious argument or research.
[^16]: J. Malpas and N. Lickiss, "Introduction to *Perspectives on Human Dignity*," in *Perspectives on Human Dignity: A Conversation*, ed. J. Malpas and N. Lickiss (Dordrecht: Springer, 2007).
[^17]: This is perhaps most evident in her *Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006). Nussbaum's "The Worth of Human Dignity: Two Tensions in Stoic Cosmopolitism" (2002) is also a touchstone historical inquiry into human dignity, though Miriam Griffin (in this volume) presents some challenges to Nussbaum's history. See Martha Nussbaum, "The Worth of Human Dignity: Two Tensions in Stoic Cosmopolitanism," in *Philosophy and Power in the Graeco-Roman World*, ed. Gillian Clark and Tessa Rajak (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 31–49.
[^18]: George Kateb, *Human Dignity* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
[^19]: Jeremy Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights*, ed. Meir Dan-Cohen (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).
[^20]: Good starting points include Edward J. Eberle, *Dignity and Liberty: Constitutional Visions in the Germany and the United States* (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002); Aharon Barak, *Human Dignity: The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014); Christopher McCrudden, "Human Dignity and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights," *European Journal of International Law* 19 (2008): 655–724; and McCrudden, ed., *Understanding Human Dignity* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014).

[^21]: McCrudden gave history another shake in his impressive edited volume *Understanding Human Dignity*. But little in the six historical chapters of that volume look backs before the nineteenth century.
[^22]: Rosen nicely points out, however, that Macklin's criticism isn't novel. Thus, as part of an attack on the Kantian legacy, Rosen notes, the nineteenth-century philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer called human dignity the "shibboleth of all the perplexed and empty headed moralists." See A. Schopenhauer, *On the Basis of Morality*, trans. E. F. J. Payne (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1965), 100, cited in Michael Rosen, *Dignity: Its History and Meaning* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012), 1. Rosen further points out that for Schopenhauer it wasn't simply the ambiguity of the concept that made it useless. Rather, Schopenhauer thought that the moralized notion of an inherent or distinctive *human* worth won and continues to win our credence only because the notion flatters our pride. It is an interestingly hypothesis, though in the context of this volume it is worth noting that the hypothesis is still older than Rosen (or Schopenhauer for that matter) noticed. In his *Fable of the Bees* (1714), Bernard Mandeville essentially made the same argument. Speaking conjecturally about the origins of morality, Mandeville wrote, "Making use of this bewitching Engine [of flattery], they [the Politicians] extoll'd the excellency of our Nature above other Animals…. Which being done, they laid before them how unbecoming it was the Dignity of such sublime Creatures to be solicitous about gratifying those Appetites, which they had in common with Brutes, and at the same time unmindful of those higher Qualities that gave them the preeminence over all visible Beings" (*The Fable of the Bees*, 2 vols. [1714; repr. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund Press, 1988], 43).
