---
title: "Reflection: Why Bioethics Isn’t Ready for Human Dignity"
author:
  name: "Marcus Düwell"
  affiliation: "Utrecht University"
editor:
  name: "Remy Debes"
  affiliation: "University of Memphis"
booktitle: "Dignity: A History"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
year: 2017
pages: "323–332"
isbn: "9780199385997"
citation_key: "Duwell2017_Bioethics"
keywords: ["dignity", "bioethics", "applied ethics", "moral ambiguity"]
abstract: |
  This reflection argues that the concept of dignity is too philosophically underdeveloped and normatively ambiguous to be effectively used in contemporary bioethics debates.
---

# *Reflection*: Why Bioethics Isn't Ready for Human Dignity
*Marcus Düwell*

Discussions in bioethics were perhaps the main reason why human dignity was so intensely debated over the last years. Bioethicists debated when the life of a person we owe respect to starts (conception, nidation, birth); what the status is of human beings with limited, uncertain, or no rational capacities (coma, brain death, Alzheimer's); what kind of obligations we have toward human beings at the end of their life (end-of-life decisions, euthanasia, advanced directives); and whether the application of various new technologies (reproductive technologies, cloning, enhancement) would lead to a reduction of human beings to mere means. And in all these debates, the concept human dignity has featured prominently. One reason for this difficulty may be that various groups tried to monopolize the use of this concept. Christian religious groups, for example, coined the concept of "dignity" as their heritage, often by intermingling it with the idea of "sanctity of life."[^1] Or consider that in debates about cloning or euthanasia, human dignity seemed to signify a general religious taboo that could even restrict the exercise of basic rights. Case in point, some got the impression that a kind of "Dignitarian Alliance"—a variety of scholars and public intellectuals holding a wide array of religious and communitarian views—used the notion of "human dignity" in a way that could undermine the normative basis of the human rights framework *in general*. [^2] Liberals on the other hand tried to outweigh concerns about legalization or toleration of euthanasia by emphasizing the importance of "dying with dignity," or they downplayed risks of biotechnologies by emphasizing that it is appropriate for human beings to act autonomously and with curiosity. In short, it is fair to say that "human dignity" became the focal point that rendered the ideological and religious signature of bioethical debates visible—that is, to the public.

On a philosophically more interesting level, however, it seems that bioethicists of all persuasions have some difficulties in understanding how the idea of human dignity as the foundational concept of the human rights framework would relate to the methodologies and concepts they are accustomed to. In the following I will reconstruct and critically discuss some dominant understandings of human dignity in bioethics, roughly following the chronology of bioethical debates.

## Instrumentalizing Human Beings

As part of the Nuremberg Trials German doctors who had conducted human experiments in Nazi concentration camps were prosecuted (sometimes called the "Doctor's Trial"). In this context, the term "human dignity" was used only incidentally, but "crimes against humanity" were extensively discussed and condemned as the *absolute barrier* to signify the morally intolerable within the realm of "medicine." At the same time the extreme case of human experiments by Nazi doctors was a reason to reconsider the standards of appropriate behavior in medicine in general. By doing so, the trial formed an important step in the direction of a change from the paternalistic Hippocratic paradigm of medical ethics toward a normative framework that would see human dignity as the requirement to respect the *authority of the patient to decide* the treatment she is undergoing ("free and informed consent"). The atrocities of the Nazis were as well the context in which the German constitution referred to human dignity. The function of human dignity in the German discussion is a complicated one, because the formulation of the constitution suggests that the commitment to human dignity is the justification of the entire basic rights and the normative order of the state. At the same time, one sees the dominant interpretation human dignity as condemning the use of human beings as "mere objects"[^3]—an implicit reference to Kant is present here, but at the same time the whole context of the Holocaust.

Thus, we find in these early debates two elements regarding human dignity: the prohibition of an instrumentalization of human beings and the idea that the patient has to authorize the action of physicians in general.[^4] And yet in recent debates bioethicists and lawyers often reduce human dignity to only the first aspect, as the interpretation of the German constitutions shows. But if we would follow this understanding, human dignity could hardly be the foundation of the entire human rights framework. One can imagine a legal order that condemns atrocities as extreme as the Holocaust but that knows only limited protection of civil and human rights, certainly when it comes to social, cultural, and economic rights. Respect for human dignity is more than prohibition of instrumentalization. If, for example, a patient does not have access to life-saving medical technology, not providing it to her certainly does not amount to using her as an instrument, since the patient is not used at all. But it is another question whether the person's dignity is respected, that we treat him or her as an end in itself, as someone that deserves to live in a political and legal order that allows her to live a life of her own. More plausible for identifying human dignity with a prohibition of instrumentalization would be the understanding that instrumentalization of human beings is immoral *because* we have to respect the authority of humans about their own life, and, accordingly, this respect should govern our praxis in general.

## Contested Moral Status

In the course of the development of bioethics since the 1970s, human dignity has played a regular role in debates focused on the beginning and end of human life, and, in turn, questions like these: What feature makes it true that we owe respect to human beings? Why do we owe this respect to humans under conditions of brain death or coma? Why should we see human beings during the earliest phases of their life as beings that have dignity? These discussions were motivated by technological developments (e.g., the possibility of artificial insemination) but quite soon resulted in fundamental questions about *whom* we owe moral respect to, including the question whether it is morally required or condemnable to treat human beings differently than animals. This also raised questions about our reasons for ascribing moral status to any kind of creature, such as whether the *potential* to develop into a human person would suffice as a reason for ascribing such a status.

However, disputants in this debate often do not distinguish clearly between the concepts "moral status" and "human dignity," which is problematic because if a specific approach, like some utilitarian ones, does not allow for the concept of 'respect for the dignity of the human being' in the first place—that is, for respecting persons in themselves independently of any consideration of their utility the question of the dignity of an embryo cannot arise. The debate is important for an understanding of human dignity because it forces us to answer some central questions clearly: Why do we owe special respect to human beings? What features of human beings are relevant for this respect? What if some human beings don't have those features, only to a limited degree, not yet, not anymore, or will never have?

These considerations help explain why in bioethics it has been contested that "humanity" can be a reason to justify respect for all human beings. Thus while some see the last taboo as broken when any being that belongs to the "human family" is excluded from the protection of human dignity, others see reference to the membership of the human species as "speciesism"—a morally dubious discrimination because a mere biological criterion is inappropriate to justify morally different treatments;[^5] the concept "human dignity" takes pride of place in those disputes. For the applicability of a concept of human dignity in all these contexts it is important to distinguish various forms of reference to the "human species." When human dignity is criticized as being "speciesistic," it is assumed that "being a member of the human species" is used as a *reason why* we owe respect to human beings. Only when referring to the biological species in such a *justificatory* sense can we speak about a morally unjustified discrimination. In the long history of "human dignity," however, the required respect is not justified by biological features but by reference to other features, like the rational nature of human beings, their capacity for action, their status as image of God, and so on. But it is something completely different if we are refereeing to species membership not as a justificatory reason but a pragmatic *criterion* for purposes of identification. Such a criterion may be important in various contexts; for example, it may be difficult or even impossible to judge to what extent a particular member of a species does or does not have some rational capacities, and we therefore extend the dignity status to all members of the species in question. Granted, other arguments against using "species membership" as a pragmatic criterion might be possible, but the criticism of speciesism is not valid.[^6] In any case, bioethics has to reconsider what weight making reference to the human species has when ascribing dignity, if any.

## Dignity of the Species?

References to the human species played a different role in the last two decades, when possible biotechnological modifications of the human species—as opposed to individuals only—found its way onto the agenda. Debates about *enhancement* focused on technologies whose application could either enhance features that are significant for human beings in general, or would have effects that go significantly beyond the scope of the individual human being—where some even affect the species as such. Genetic preimplantation diagnosis allows for selection of specific features of the preimplantation embryo; cloning would allow for duplicating the genetic structure of an individual human being; and there are other technologies in the pipeline that could enhance human characteristics more dramatically, including the possibility of introducing genetic material of animals into humans. In this milieu, it has been claimed that the dignity of human beings obliges us to do our best to enhance the human living condition, including the genetic makeup of the human being, and to try to transcend the biological limitations of the human species, and, in turn, to come to a "posthuman dignity."[^7] Others introduce the idea of a "dignity of the species" in a way that would require us to refrain from using such technologies, especially those whose application would allow us to decide about the genetic makeup of the offspring.[^8] Such an application would be unacceptable, such dissenters argue, because it would introduce a form of irreversible dependency in the relationship between the generations that undermines the possibilities of a society where individuals would have to recognize each other as equals, a central element of a society based on human dignity. The science-fiction-like nature of those debates should not allow us ignore the fact that these debates have a strong tendency to move the subject of human dignity from the individual to the collective level. This forces us to develop an understanding of how respect for an individual, which human dignity traditionally is claimed to require, relates to obligations toward the species as such.

## Bioethics' Problem with Dignity

Other topics could have been mentioned here, such as whether or not respect for human dignity requires us to refrain from the commodification of human tissues, or whether or not it requires us to assist people in their wish to end their life in cases of terminal illness. But it seems more important to get an understanding of *why* bioethicists have such a problem navigating the question of human dignity in all those debates. Why is bioethics not well prepared to understand human dignity? Most bioethical texts do not have a clear idea what kind of concept they should treat human dignity *as—*as a rule? A right? A principle? An absolute barrier against extreme atrocities? Or as the foundational concept of the human rights framework?[^9] This lack of clarity is all the more pressing given that the entire international regulatory system of the life sciences is part of the human rights framework. Bioethicists have insufficiently reflected on their relationship to this framework which may be one of the reasons why some scholars have seen fit to call it an unclear or even "useless concept."[^10] But perhaps they are noting not a shortcoming of the concept of human dignity, but rather a shortcoming of the methodological tools of bioethicists, which tools may not be appropriate for reaching an understanding of the complexity of those debates. The mainstream in bioethics as "principlism" works with normative concepts such as "midlevel principles,"[^11] which treat the normative reference points of bioethical debates as principles (like beneficence or autonomy) that divergent ethical positions are assumed to agree on. Bioethical debates according to those approaches have the task merely of specifying the normative content of those mid-level principles with regard to concrete moral questions, and then of weighing the principles against each other. If this is the model of a "principle," the role of human dignity must be unclear. But if human dignity is the foundational concept of the human rights framework, it must be another type of normative concept than, for example, the right to informed consent. Most bioethicists treat "principles" as a one-dimensional concept. There is a variety of principles that are relevant for specific contexts or practices but whose systematic relationship is hardly clarified. Human dignity doesn't make that much sense when treated as a mid-level principle. We can, however, see human dignity as a principle that reflects on the specificity of human beings and explains why each human being has the status of a rights holder that deserves respect as an individual. But if *each* human being deserves such a respect, the right to be protected cannot just be protected on the level of the individual, and therefore we have necessarily to deal in social and political terms. It is the societal conditions that determine to what extent we are able to enjoy the content of human rights; Gewirth has coined the term "generic rights" for rights to the conditions of exercising rights, which are presupposed by all other rights.[^12] Questions about human dignity in the context of biotechnology are increasingly dealing with the design of a society and the global world and the question to what extent human beings still have the possibility of living a life wherein they are respected in their authority to govern central aspects of this life, wherein they can decide about access to their own genetic data, and wherein they have access to basic medical treatment and can live under stable and secure ecological conditions.

Only if we understand that in the concept of human dignity questions about the role of humanity, the rights of individuals, and the structure of our normative social and political orders are interconnected, will fruitful debates about human dignity be possible. Instead of bashing "human dignity" as vague and useless, bioethicists could start to ask self-critically whether they are sufficiently prepared to deal with such a concept. But if bioethicists want to give normative orientation in questions of life and death, they are confronted with the question that*—*according to Kant*—*is the most fundamental question: What is it to be a human being? In that sense, human dignity is not a useless but a necessary and unavoidable concept.

[^1]: See, e.g., L. R. Kass, *Life, Liberty, and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge for Bioethics* (San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2002).
[^2]: D. Beyleveld and R. Brownsword, *Consent in the Law* (Oxford: Hart, 2007), 9–48.
[^3]: G. Dürig, "Der Grundrechtssatz von der Menschenwürde," *Archiv des offentlichen Rechts* 81 (1956): 117–56.
[^4]: Beyleveld and Brownsword, *Consent in the Law*.
[^5]: Peter Singer, *Practical Ethics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
[^6]: Marcus Düwell, *Methods, Theories, Domains* (New York: Routledge, 2012), 109–24.
[^7]: N. Bostrom, "In Defense of Posthuman Dignity," *Bioethics* 19, no. 3 (2005): 202–14.
[^8]: Jürgen Habermas, *The Future of Human Nature*, trans. W. Beister (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2003).
[^9]: M. Düwell, Jens Braarvig, Roger Brownsword, and Dietmar Mieth, eds., *Cambridge Handbook on Human Dignity: Interdisciplinary Perspectives* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 23–49.
[^10]: R. Maclin, "Dignity as a Useless Concept," *British Medical Journal* 327 (2003): 1419–20.
[^11]: T. L. Beauchamp and J. F. Childress, *Principles of Biomedical Ethics* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012).
[^12]: Alan Gewirth, *Reason and Morality* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978).
